!-!-! I. GENESIS. 

I. IN the beginning God made the heaven and the earth. 

2 And the earth was invisible and unfurnished and there was 
darkness over this abyss ; and a breath of God was brought on 

3 above the water. And God said, " Let there be Light ; " and 

4 there was light. And God saw the light that it was good. And 
God made a separation between the light and the darkness. 

5 And God called the light day ; and the darkness he called night. 
And there was an evening and there was a morning. The 
first day. 

6 Then God said, " Let there be a firmament in the midst of 
the water ; and let it make a separation between water and wa- 

7 ter." And it was so. God made the firmament ; and God made 
a separation between the water which was below the firmament 

8 and the water which was above the firmament. And God called 
the firmament, heaven. And God saw that it was good. And 
there was an evening and there was a morning. The second day. 

9 Then God said, "Let the water which is below the hea- 
ven be gathered into one receptacle and let the dry land ap- 
pear." And it was so. The waters which were below the 
heaven were gathered into their several collections, and the dry 

10 land appeared. And God called the dry land, earth ; and the 
collections of the waters he called, seas. And God saw that it 

11 was good. And God said, "Let the earth produce the grassy 
plant with sowing seed according to kind and according to like- 
ness, and the fruit bearing tree together with the fruit, the seed 
of which is in it according to kind, upon the earth." And it 

12 was so. The earth indeed produced the grassy plant with 
sowing seed according to kind and according to likeness, and 
the fruit tree together with fruit, the seed of which is in it, 
according to kind, in the earth. And God saw that it was 

13 good. And there was an evening and there was a morning. 
The third day. 

14 Then God said, "Let there be luminaries in the firma- 
ment of heaven, to give light on the earth ; to make a separa- 
tion between the day and the night : and let them be for signs 

15 and for seasons and for days and for years ; and let them be 
for an illumination in the firmament of heaven so as to shine 

16 on the earth." And it was so. God indeed made the two 
great luminaries, the greater luminary for the regulations of 

VOL. I. A 



!-!-! I. GENESIS. 

the day, and the lesser luminary, with the stars, for the regu- 

17 lations of the night. And God placed them in the firmament of 
heaven so as to shine on the earth, and to regulate the day and 
the night, and to make a division between the light and the 

18 darkness. And God saw that it was good. And there was an 
evening and there was a morning. The fourth day. 

20 Then God said, " Let the waters produce moving crea- 
tures having life ; and winged creatures flying above the earth 

21 in the open firmament of heaven." And it was so. God in- 
deed made the great sea monsters and every species of moving 
animals which the waters produced according to their kinds, 

22 and every winged flying creature according to kind. And 
God saw that they were good. And God blessed them saying, 
" Increase and multiply and fill the waters in the seas, and let 

23 flying creatures be multiplied on the earth." And there was an 
evening and there was a morning. The fifth day. 

24 Then God said, " Let the earth produce animal life accord- 
ing to kind ; four footed beasts and reptiles and wild beasts 

25 of the earth according to kind." And it was so. God indeed 
made the wild beasts of the earth according to their kind, and 
the cattle according to their kind, and all the reptiles of the 
earth according to kind. And God saw that they were good. 

26 Then God said, " Let us make man after our image and after 
a likeness ; and let them have dominion over the fishes of the 
sea, and the fowls of the air, and the cattle, and the whole 

27 earth, and all the reptiles which creep on the earth." So God 
made man. After an image of God he made him. A male and 

28 a female he made them. And God blessed them saying, " In- 
crease and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it ; and have 
dominion over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, 
and all the cattle, and all the earth, and all the reptiles which 

29 creep on the earth." Moreover God said, " Behold I have given 
you every seed bearing plant, the sowing seed which is on the 
whole earth, and every tree which hath in itself the fruit of se- 

30 minal seed, you shall have for food : And to all the beasts of 
the earth, and to all the birds of the air, and to every reptile on 
the earth, which hath in it animal life, I have also given every 

31 green herb for food." And it was so. And God saw all the 



!-!-! IL GENESIS. 

things which he had made, and behold they were very good. 
And there was an evening and there was a morning. The sixth 
day. 
II. Thus were finished the heaven and the earth and all the ar- 

2 rangement of them. And God finished on the sixth day these 
his works which he made ; and on the seventh day he desisted 

3 from all these works of his which he made. And God blessed 
the seventh day and hallowed it ; because on it he rested from 
all these works of his which God had taken occasion to make. 

4 This is the genealogy of heaven and earth. When they were 

5 made, — on the day when the Lord God had made the heaven and 
the earth, and all the verdure of the field, before it was on the 
earth, and every herb of the field, before it sprang up, (for God 

6 had not rained on the earth, nor was there a man to till it ; 
but a fountain ascended out of the earth and watered the whole 

7 face of the ground,) then God formed the man, dust from the 
earth, and breathed upon his face a breath of life, and the man 

8 became a living soul. And God planted a garden in Eden to- 
wards the east and placed there the man whom he had made. 

9 And God caused to spring up there also out of that ground 
every tree beautiful to the sight and good for food, and the tree 
of life in the middle of the garden, and the tree for the pur- 
pose of knowing what was to be known of good and evil. 

10 Now a river issueth out of Eden to water the garden: 

11 thence it is divided into four heads. The name of the first is 
Physon. This is that which encircleth the whole country 
Evilat, where there is gold, and the gold of that country is good. 

12 There also is the carbuncle and the Prasian stone. And the 

13 name of the second river is Geon. This is that which encircleth 

14 the whole country of Ethiopia. And the third river is Tigris. 
This is that which floweth down over against the Assyrians. 
And the fourth river is Euphrates. 

15 And the Lord God took the man whom he had made, and 
placed him in this garden of pleasure to work it and to watch. 

16 And the Lord God gave a charge to Adam, saying, "Of 
every tree which is in the garden for food, thou mightest have 

17 eaten ; but from this tree, that you may know good and evil, you 
must not eat of it. On the day you eat of it, by death you shall 
die." 



!-!-! III. GENESIS. 

18 Then the Lord God said, "It is not good that the man 
should be alone : let us make for him a helper correspondent 

19 to himself." Now God had also formed out of the earth all 
the beasts of the field, and all the birds of the air, and brought 
them to Adam to see what he would call them. And what- 
ever Adam called every living creature, that was its name. 

20 So Adam gave names to all the cattle, and to all the fowls of the 
air, and to all the wild beasts of the field. But for Adam there was 

21 not found a helper like himself. Then God brought an ecstasy 
upon Adam and caused him to sleep, and took one of his ribs 

22 and filled up flesh instead thereof. And God built up the rib, 
which he took from Adam, into a woman, and brought her to 

23 Adam. And Adam said, " This now is bone of my bones, and 
flesh of my flesh, let her be called Woman." Because she was 

24 taken out of her man, therefore a man is to leave his father 
and his mother and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be 
one flesh. 

III. Now the two, both Adam and his wife were naked, and 
were not ashamed. But the serpent was the wisest of all the 
beasts on the earth which the Lord God had made, and the 
serpent said to the woman, " Why hath God said, you must 

2 not eat of every tree of the garden ? " And the woman said 

3 to the serpent, "Of the fruit of the trees of the garden we 
may eat ; but of the fruit of the tree which is in the middle 
of the garden, God said, You shall not eat of it, nor touch it, 

4 that you may not die." xincl the serpent said to the woman, 

5 " You will not by death die. For God knew that in the day 
you eat thereof, your eyes would be opened and you would 

6 be like gods knowing good and evil." And the woman saw 
that the tree was good for food ; and that it is delightful to see 
with the eyes ; and that to exercise understanding is comely, 
so having taken some of the fruit thereof, she ate and gave 

7 also to her husband with her. And when they had eaten, the eyes 
of them both were opened, and they perceived that they were 
naked. And they sewed together fig leaves and made for 

8 themselves girdles. And when they heard the sound of the 
Lord God walking in the garden in the evening, both Adam 
and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord 
God, among the trees of the garden. 



!-!-! III. GENESIS. 

9 And the Lord God called Adam and said to him, " Adam, 
where art thou?" And he said to him, "I heard the sound 
of thee walking in the garden and I was afraid, because I am 

11 naked, and I hid myself." And God said to him, "Who 
told thee that thou art naked, if so be thou hast not eaten of 
the tree of which alone I commanded thee not to eat of this ? " 

12 And xVdam said, " The woman whom thou gavest to be with 

13 me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat." And the Lord 
God said to the woman, " Why hast thou done this ? " And 

14 the woman said, " The serpent seduced me and I ate." And 
the Lord God said to the serpent, "Because thou hast done 
this, thou art cursed from all the cattle and from all the beasts 
which are upon the earth. Upon thy breast and belly thou 

15 shalt go and shalt eat earth all the days of thy life. And I will 
put enmity between thee and the woman ; and between thy 

16 seed and her seed. He will wound thy head, and thou wilt 
wound his heel." And to the woman he said, " I will great- 
ly multiply thy sorrows and thy anguish. With sorrows thou 
shalt bear children and to thy husband shall be thy recourse, 

17 and he shall rule over thee." And to Adam he said, " Be- 
cause thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and eaten 
of the tree of which alone I commanded thee not to eat, the 
ground is cursed by thy labours. With sorrows thou shalt 

18 eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns and thistles it shall 
cause to spring up for thee, and thou shalt eat the herbs of the 

19 field. By the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat thy bread until 
thou return into the earth out of which thou wast taken ; for 
earth thou art and to earth thou shalt return." 

20 And Adam called the name of his wife Life, because she 

21 was to be the mother of all the living. And the Lord God 
made for Adam and his wife garments of skin and cloathed 
them. 

22 And God said, " Behold Adam was made like one of us to 
know good and evil. And now perhaps he may stretch forth his 
hand and take of the tree of life and eat, so shall he live for 

23 ever." So the Lord God sent him out of the garden of plea- 
sure to till the ground out of which he was taken. And when 
he put Adam out he caused him to dwell over against the gar- 
den of pleasure and stationed the Cherubim and the whirling 
flame of fire to keep the way to the tree of life. 



!-!-! IV. GENESIS. 

IV. AdcI Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and 

2 brought forth Cain, and said, " I have gotten a man from 
God." And again she brought forth his brother Abel. And 
Abel became a keeper of sheep, and Cain tilled the ground. 

3 And when in process of time Cain brought of the fruits of the 
earth a sacrifice to the Lord, and Abel also brought, he indeed 
of the firstlings of his flock even some of the fattest of them, 

5 God looked upon Abel and on his gifts ; but upon Cain and 
upon his sacrifices he did not look with regard. Thereupon 
Cain was exceedingly grieved and his countenance became 

6 dejected. And the Lord God said to Cain, "Why art thou 
become sorrowful and why is thy countenance dejected ? '' 

7 Though thou hast offered right, yet if thou hast not rightly 
divided, hast thou not sinned? Be composed. To thee shall 
be his recourse, and thou shalt rule over him." 

8 Then Cain said to Abel his brother, "Let us go into the 
plain." And when they were in the plain, Cain rose upon Abel 

9 his brother and slew him. And when the Lord God said to 
Cain, " Where is Abel thy brother ? " he said I know not. Am 

10 I my brother's keeper? Then the Lord said, "What hast 
thou done? The voice of thy brother's blood crieth to me 

11 out of the ground. Now therefore thou art cursed from this 
land, which hath opened its mouth to receive the blood of thy 
brother from thy hand. When thou tillest the ground, it will 
not henceforth yield thee its strength. Thou shalt be in a state 

12 of anguish and terror in this land.'' And Cain said to the Lord 
God, " Is my fault too great to be forgiven ? If thou castest 
me out this day from the face of this land and I be hid from 
thy presence and be in a state of anguish and terror in the land, 
it will come to pass that whoever findeth me will kill me." 

15 And the Lord said to him, " Not so. Whosoever killeth Cain 
shall suffer seven fold vengeance." And the Lord God gave a sign 

16 to Cain, that whoever found him would not kill him. So Cain 
went out from the presence of God and dwelt in the land of 

17 Naid over against Eden. And Cain knew his wife, and she 
conceived and brought forth Enoch. And he employed himself 
in building a city and he called the city Enoch after his son's 

18 name. And to Enoch was born Gaidad ; and Gaidad begot 
Maleleel, and Maleleel begot Mathousala, and Mathuusala be- 



!-!-! V. GENESIS. 

2:ot Lamech. And Lamech took to himself two wives. The 

name of the first was Aria ; and the name of the second Sella. 

20 And Ada bore Jobel. He was the father of them who dwell in 

tents, feeding cattle. And the name of his brother was Jon- 

22 bal. He was the inventor of the psaltery and kithara. As for 
Sella, she also bore Thobel, and he was a smith, a manufac- 
turer of brass and iron ; and the sister of Thobel was Noe- 
ma. And Lamech said to his wives Ada and Sella, 

23 " Hearken to my voice, ye wives of Lamech, 
" Listen attentively to my words. 

" For have I slain a man that I should be wounded, 
" And a young man that I should be hurt ? 

24 " For seven fold vengeance was to be taken for Cain ; 
" But for Lamech will be taken seventy times seven." 

25 And Adam knew Eve his wife and she conceived and brought 
forth a son and called his name Seth, saying, " For God hath 

26 raised up for me another seed in the place of Abel whom Cain 
slew." And Seth had a son ; and he called his name Enos. 
He hoped that he would invoke the name of the Lord God. 

V. This is the genealogy of men. 

2 On the day God made Adam, he made him after an image 
of God. A male and a female he made them, and blessed 
them. And he called his name Adam on the day he made 

3 them. And Adam lived two hundred and thirty years, and 
begot a son after his own likeness and after his own image, 

4 and called his name Seth. And the days of Adam which he 
lived after he begot Seth were seven hundred years, and he 

5 begot sons and daughters. So all the days of Adam which he 
lived were nine hundred and thirty years, and he died. 

6 And Seth lived two hundred and five years and begot 
Enos. And Seth lived after he begot Enos seven hundred and 
seven years and begot sons and daughters. So all the days of 
Seth were nine hundred and twelve years, and he died. 

9 And Enos lived one hundred and ninety years and begot 
Kaiuan. And Enos lived after he begot Kainan seven hun- 
dred and fifteen years, and begot sons and daughters. So all 
the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years, and he 
died. 
12 And Kainan lived one hundred and seventy years and be- 



!-!-! VI. GENESIS. 

got Maleleel. And Kaiuan lived after he begot Maleleel seven 
hundred and forty years and begot sons and daughters. So all 
the days of Kainan were nine hundred and ten years, and he 
died. 

15 And Maleleel lived one hundred and sixty five years and 
begot Jared. And Maleleel lived after he begot Jared seven hun- 
dred and thirty years and begot sons and daughters. So all 
the days of Maleleel were eight hundred and ninety five years, 
and he died. 

18 And Jared lived one hundred and sixty two years and begot 
Enoch. And Jared lived after he begot Enoch eight hundred 
years and begot sons and daughters. So all the days of Jared 
were nine hundred and sixty two years, and he died. 

21 And Enoch lived one hundred and sixty five years and be- 
got Mathousala. And Enoch continued to please God after 
he begot Mathousala two hundred years and begot sons and 
daughters. And all the days of Enoch were three hundred 
and sixty 1iYe years. And Enoch continued to please God 
and was not found, for God translated hirn. 

25 xlnd Mathousala lived one hundred and eighty seven 
years and begot Lamech. And Mathousala lived after he be- 
got Lamech seven hundred and eighty two years and begot 
sons and daughters. So all the days of Mathousala which he 
lived were nine hundred and sixty nine years, and he died. 

28 And Lamech lived one hundred and eighty eight years 

and begot a son and called his name Noe, saying " This child 
will cause us to cease from our works and from the toils of 
our hands and from the earth which the Lord hath cursed. 
And Lamech lived after he begot Noe five hundred and sixty 
Hve years and begot sons and daughters. So all the days of 
Lamech were seven hundred and fifty three years, and he 
died. 

VI. And Noe was five hundred years old and he had three 
sons, Sem, Cham, Japheth. And it came to pass when the 
men began to be multiplied on the earth and daughters were 

2 born to them, that the sons of God seeing the daughters of 
men that they were fair, took to themselves wives of all whom 

3 they chose : then the Lord God said, " My breath must not 
continue in these men to this age, because they are flesh ; their 



!-!-! VI. GENESIS. 

days however, shall be an hundred and twenty years." Now 
there were giants on the earth in those days, and after that 
when the sons of God went in unto the daughters of men and 

5 they bore to them. These were the giants of old, the men of 
renown. So when the Lord God saw that the wickedness of 
the men on the earth was multiplied, and that every one was 

6 in his heart studiously and continually bent upon evils, God 

7 was grieved that he had made man on the earth. And God 
came to a determination and said, "I will blot out from the 
face of this earth the man I have made, both man and beast ; 

8 both reptiles and birds of the air. For I am grieved that I 
made them. But Noe found favour in the sight of the Lord 
God. 

9 Now these are the generations of Noe. Noe was a just 
man; and being perfect in the tenor of his life, Noe pleased 

10 God. And Noe had three sons, Sem, Cham, Japheth. Now 

11 the earth was corrupt before God ; and the earth was filled 

12 with iniquity. And God beheld the earth and it was corrupt. 
Because all flesh had corrupted their way on the earth ; 

13 therefore the Lord God said to Noe, " The time of every 
man is come before me. Because the earth is filled with ini- 
quity by their means, therefore behold I am going to destroy 
them and the earth. Make therefore for thyself an ark of 

14 squared timber. Thou shalt make the ark with small apart- 

15 ments, and pitch it on the inside and outside with pitch. And 
in this manner thou shalt make the ark. Three hundred cu- 
bits shall be the length of the ark, and fifty cubits the breadth, 

16 and thirty cubits the height thereof. In building the ark thou 
shalt narrow the breadth and finish it above at a cubit. And 
thou shalt make the door of the ark out of the sides. With 

17 lower, second and third stories thou shalt make it. Now be- 
hold I am going to bring a flood of water upon the earth to 
destroy all flesh in which is the breath of life under heaven, 
and all that are on the earth shall die ; and I will establish my 

18 covenant with thee. Thou therefore shalt go into the ark, thou 

19 and thy sons and thy wife and thy sons' wives with thee. 
And of all the cattle, and of all the reptiles, and of all the wild 
beasts, even of all flesh thou shalt bring into the ark a pair of 

20 every sort, that thou mayest nourish them with thyself. They 

VOL. I. B 



Cb. VII. GENESIS. 

shall be a male with a female. Of all the winged fowls ac- 
cording to kind, and of all the cattle according to kind, and 
of all the reptiles which creep on the earth according to their 
kind, pairs of every sort shall come to thee, a male with a fe- 

21 male, to be fed with thee. Thou shalt therefore take to thee of 
all the varieties of food which you eat, and collect it to thee, 
and it shall be for thee and for them to eat." 

22 And ISToe did all that the Lord God commanded him ; 
VII. and when he had done so, the Lord God said to Noe, 

" Go into the ark, thou and all thy family, for I have seen thee 

2 righteous before me in this generation. And of all the cattle 
which are clean take thee seven pairs, a male with a female, 
and of all the cattle which are not clean, pairs, a male with a 

3 female ; and of the birds of the air which are clean, seven pairs, 
male and female, and of all the birds which are not clean, 

4 pairs, male and female, to nourish seed on the earth. For yet 
seven days and I bring rain upon the earth forty days and for- 
ty nights. And I will blot out from the face of the whole earth 
all the raised which I made." 

5 And Noe did all that the Lord God commanded him. 

6 Now Noe was six hundred years old when the deluge of water 

7 came on the earth. And Noe and his sons and his wife and 

8 his sons' wives with him went into the ark on account of the 
water of the deluge. And of the fowls which were clean and 
of the fowls which were not clean, and of the beasts which were 
clean and of the beasts which were not clean, and of all the rep- 

9 tiles which creep on the earth, pairs went to Noe into the ark, 

10 a male with a female as God commanded Noe. And it came 
to pass after the seven days that the water of the flood came 
on the earth. 

11 In the six hundredth year of Noe's life, the second month 
and twenty seventh day of the month, on that day all the foun- 

12 tains of the abyss were burst open and the cataracts of 
heaven were opened, and there came rain on the earth forty 

13 days and forty nights. On that day Noe, Sem, Cham, Japheth, 
the sons of Noe, and Noe's wife and the three wives of his 

14 sons with him went into the ark : And all the beasts accord- 
ing to kind, and all the cattle according to kind, and every 

15 moving reptile on the earth according to its kind, and every 



Cb. VIII. GENESIS. 

kind of winged fowls went to Noe into the ark, two and two, 
a male and a female of all flesh in which is the breath of life. 

16 And when they, that were going in, male and female of all 
flesh, had gone in as God commanded Noe, the Lord God 

17 shut up the ark on the outside, and the deluge came on the 
earth forty days and forty nights. And the water increased ex- 
ceedingly and lifted up the ark, and it was raised up from 

IS the earth. And the water prevailed and was exceedingly in- 
creased on the earth : And the ark was borne up above the 

19 water. Still the water prevailed more and more on the earth 
and covered all the high mountains which were under the 

20 heaven. Fifteen cubits above was the water raised when it 

21 had covered all the high mountains. And all animate flesh on 
the earth of fowls and cattle and wild beasts and every moving 

22 reptile on the earth and every man died. Every thing which 
hath the breath of life, even every thing which was on the dry 

23 land died. It swept away every thing raised up, which was 
on the face of the earth, man and cattle and reptiles and the 
fowls of the air. They were swept away from the earth, and 
Noe alone was left and they who were with him in the ark. 

24 And the water was raised up above the earth a hundred and 
fifty days. 

VIII. Now God had remembered Noe and all the beasts and 
all the cattle and all the fowls and all the reptiles which creep, 
even all that were with him in the ark ; and God brought a 
'2 wind over the earth and aswaged the water. And the foun- 
tains of the abyss were shut up and also the cataracts of heaven 
and the rain from heaven was stayed : and the water running 

3 off from the earth subsided ; so after a hundred and fifty days 
the water was lessened and the ark grounded in the seventh 
month and twenty seventh day of the month upon the nioun- 

4 tains of Ararat. Still the water continued to lessen till the 

5 tenth month. And in the tenth month, on the first, day of the 

6 month, the tops of the mountains appeared. And after forty 
days Noe opened the window which he had made in the ark 

7 and sent forth a raven ; and it having gone out did not return 

8 till the water was dried up from the earth. So he sent out after 

9 it the dove to see if the water was abated from the earth ; and 
the dove finding no resting place for its feet, returned to him 



Oh. IX. GENESIS. 

into the ark, for the water was on the whole face of the earth. 
Therefore he stretched out his hand and brought it to him in- 

10 to the ark. And having waited yet other seven days, he again 

11 sent forth the dove out of the ark, and towards evening the 
dove returned to him and it had an olive leaf, a dry leaf in its 

12 bill. So Noe knew that the water was abated from the earth. 
And having waited yet other seven days he again sent out the 
dove, and it returned to him no more. 

13 And it came to pass in the six hundred and first year of 
Noe's life, in the first month and the first day of the month, 
the water was gone from the earth ; and Xoe removed 
the covering of the ark which he had made, and he saw 

14 that the water was gone from the face of the earth. And 

15 in the second month and twenty seventh day of the month, 
when the ground was dry, the Lord God spoke to Noe saying, 

16 " Go forth out of the ark, thou and thy wife and thy sons and 
thy sons' wives with thee, and all the beasts which are with 

17 thee, even all flesh both of fowls and cattle. Take out al- 
so with thee every moving reptile on the earth, and be ye 

18 fruitful and multiplied on the earth." So Noe and his wife 

19 and his sons and his sons' wives with him went out. And all 
the beasts and all the cattle and every fowl and every moving 
reptile on the earth according to their kind, went forth out of 

20 the ark. And Noe built an altar to the Lord, and took of all 
the cattle which are clean and of all the fowls which are clean, 

21 and offered them up upon the altar for a whole homage offering. 
And the Lord God smelled a sweet savour, and the Lord 
God having come to a determination, said, "I will no more 
curse the ground on account of the works of men. Though 
the imagination of man is studiously bent upon evils from his 
youth, I will not on that account again smite all living flesh, 

22 as I have done. While the earth continueth, seed time and 
harvest, cold and heat, summer and spring, with a succession 
of day and night shall not cease." 

IX. Then God blessed Noe and his sons and said to them, 

" Increase and multiply and replenish the earth and have do- 

2 minion over it ; and let the fear and the dread of you be upon 

all the beasts of the earth, and on all the birds of the air, and 

on all that move on the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea. 



<l.. IX. GENESIS. 

To you I have subjected them and every reptile which hath 

3 life. They shall be food for you. As the herb of grass I have 

4 given you them all. But flesh with the blood of life you shall 

5 not eat. For with regard to your blood of your lives, I will in- 
deed make inquisition for it at the hand of the beasts. At the 
hand of a man's brother I will make inquisition for the life of 

6 man. He who sheddeth man's blood shall for it have his own 

7 blood poured out ; for in an image of God I have made man. As 
for you therefore be fruitful and multiply and replenish the 
earth and have dominion over it." 

8 Moreover God spoke to Noe and to his sons with him, 

9 saying, "Behold I renew my covenant with you and with your 

10 seed after you, and with every living creature with you both 
birds and cattle and with all the wild beasts of the earth which 

11 are with you ; even with all that went out of the ark. And this 
covenant of mine I will lay before you. All flesh shall no more 
die by the water of a deluge ; nor shall there any more be a 
deluge of water to destroy the whole earth." 

12 Moreover the Lord God said to Noe, "This is the sign of 
the covenant which I make between me and you and every 
living creature which is with you for perpetual generations. 

13 This bow of mine I place in the clouds and it shall be for a 

14 sign of the covenant between me and the earth, so that when 

15 I cause clouds to gather upon the earth, the bow shall be seen 
in the cloud ; and I will remember this my covenant, which is 
between me and you and every life living in all flesh, and the 

lb* water shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh. When 
this my bow shall be in the cloud, I will look that I may re- 
member the everlasting covenant between me and the earth 

17 and life living in all flesh which is on the earth. Therefore 
(said God to Noe) this is the sign of the covenant which I have 
made between me and all flesh which is on the earth." 

18 Now these were the sons of Noe who went out of the ark, 

19 Sem, Cham, and Japheth. And Cham was the father of Cha- 
naan. These three are the sons of Noe. From them men were 
disseminated over the whole earth. 

20 Now Noe being a husbandman, began and planted a vine- 

21 yard, and he drank of the wine and was intoxicated and un- 

22 covered in his house. And Cham, the father of Chanaan, saw 



Ck. X. GENESIS. 

the nakedness of his father, and going out told his two brothers 

23 without. Whereupon Sem and Japheth took the garment and 
put it on both their shoulders, and went backwards and covered 
the nakedness of their father ; and their faces being turned 

24 from him, they did not see the nakedness of their father. 

25 And when Noe recovered from the wine and knew what 
his younger son had done to him, he said, 

" Ah devoted Chanaan ! 

" To his brethren he will be a domestic servant. 

26 Moreover he said, 

" Blessed be the Lord God of Sem : 

" And let Chanaan be his domestic servant. 

27 " God make room for Japheth ! 

" And let him dwell in the tents of Sem, 
" And let Chanaan become his servant." 

28 And Noe lived after the flood three hundred and fifty 

29 years. So all the days of Noe were nine hundred and fifty 
years, and he died. 

X. Now these are the generations of the sons of Noe, Sem, 
Cham, Japheth, to whom sons were born after the flood. 

2 The sons of Japheth, Gamer, and Magog and Madoi and 

3 Jovan and Elisa and Thobel and Mosoch and Theiras. And 
the sons of Gamer, Aschanaz and Kiphath and Thorgama. 

4 And the children of Jovan, Elisa, and the Tharsians, Ketians, 

5 Khodians. By these the islands of the nations were set apart in 
their land, each according to their language in their tribes and 
in their nations. 

6 And the sons of Cham ; Chous, and Mesrain, Phoud and 

7 Chanaan. And the children of Chous ; Saba and Evila and Sa- 

8 bath a and Begma and Sabathaka. And the sons of Begma ; Sa- 

9 ba and Dadan. And Chous begot Nebrod. He began to be a 
giant on the earth. He was a giant hunter before the Lord 
God. For this cause they say, " Like Nebrod the giant hunter 

10 before the Lord." And the beginning of his kingdom was 
Babylon and Orech and Archad and Chalane in the land of 

11 Senaar. From this land Assour went out and builded Ninive 

12 and the city Booboth and Chalach and Dase, between Ninive 

1 3 and Chalach. This was the great city. And Mesrain begot the 
Tjoudieims and the Nephthaleims, and the Enemetieims, and 



!-!-! XL GENESIS. 

14 Labieiins, and Patrosonieirus, and the Chasmonieinis (from 
whom descended the Philistines) and the Gapkthorieiins. And 

15 Chanaan begot Sidon his first born, and Chettaius, and Jebou- 
saius and Amoraius and Gergasaius and Evaius and Arou- 
kaius and Asennaius and Aradius and Samaraius and Amathius. 

19 And after this the tribes of the Chananites were dispersed. 
And the boundaries of the Chananites were from Sidon ex- 
tending to Gerara and Gaza, thence extending to Sodom and 

20 Gomorra, Adama and Seboin even to Dasa. These were the 
children of Cham in their tribes according to their languages 
in their countries and in their nations. 

21 To Sem also children were born even to him who was the 
father of all the children of Eber and the brother of Japheth 

22 who was older than he. The children of Sem were Elam and 

23 Assour and Arphaxad and Loud and Aram and Kainan. And 
the children of Aram were Ouz and Oul and Gater and Mo- 

24 soch. And Arphaxad begot Kainan; and Kainan begot Sala; 

25 and Sala begot Eber; and to Eber were born two sons, the 
name of the one was Phaleg, because in his days the earth was 

26 divided, and his brother's name was Jektan. And Jektan be- 

27 got Elmodad and Saleth and Sarmoth and Jarach and Odorra 

28 and Aibel and Dekla and Eval and Abimael and Saba and 

29 Oupheir and Evila and Jobab. All these were the children of 

30 Jektan, and their dwelling was from Massa extending to Sap- 

31 hera a mountain of the east. These were the children of Sem 
in their tribes according to their tongues in their countries 
and in their nations. 

32 These were the tribes of the children of Noe according to 
their descents and according to their nations. From these 
were peopled the different countries of the nations on the 
earth after the flood. 

XL Now when the whole earth was of one lip and all had one 

2 voice, it came to pass as they were moving from the east that 
they found a plain in the land of Sennaar and settled there. 

3 And they said one to another, Come let us make bricks and 
bake them with fire. Now the bricks served them for stone 

4 and their mortar was asphaltus. And they said, Come, let us 
build for ourselves a city and a tower, the top of which shall 
be up to heaven ; and let us make a name for ourselves before 



!-!-! XL GENESIS. 

5 we be scattered on the face of the whole earth. And the Lord 
came down to see the city and the tower which the children 

6 of men were building. And the Lord said, Behold they are all 
of one race and one lip. And this they have begun to do ; and 
now nothing will fail of all which they may determine to do. 

7 Come, let us go down and there confound their language that 

8 they may not understand each other's voice. So the Lord 
dispersed them from that place over the face of the whole 

9 earth, and they left off building the city and the tower. For 
this cause the name of it was called Confusion, because 
there the Lord confounded the lips of the whole earth, and 
dispersed them thence over the face of the whole earth. 

10 Noav these are the generations of Sem. Sem was an hun- 

11 dred years old when he begot Arphaxad the second year after 
the flood. And Sem lived after he begot Arphaxad five hun- 
dred years and begot sons and daughters, and died. 

12 And Arphaxad lived a hundred and thirty five years and 
begot Kainan. And Arphaxad lived after he begot Kainan four 
hundred years and begot sons and daughters, and died. 

13 And Kainan lived a hundred and thirty years and begot 
Sala ; and Kainan lived after he begot Sala three hundred and 
thirty years and begot sons and daughters, and died. 

14 And Sala lived a hundred and thirty years and begot Eber ; 
and Sala lived after he begot Eber three hundred and thirty 
years and begot sons and daughters, and died. 

16 And Eber lived a hundred and thirty four years and begot 
Phaleg ; and Eber lived after he begot Phaleg two hundred 
and seventy years and begot sons and daughters, and died. 

18 And Phaleg lived a hundred and thirty years and begot 
Ragau; and Phaleg lived after he begot Kagau two hundred 
and nine years and begot sons and daughters, and died. 

20 And Ragau lived a hundred and thirty two years and be- 
got Serouch ; and Ragau lived after he begot Serouch two 
hundred and seven years and begot sons and daughters, and 
died. 

22 And Serouch lived a hundred and thirty years and begot 
Nachor; and Serouch lived after he begot Nachor two hun- 
dred years and begot sons and daughters, and died. 

24 And Nachor lived a hundred and seventy nine years and 



!-!-! XII. GENESIS. 

begot Tharra ; and Nachor lived after lie begot Tharra a hun- 
dred and twenty five years and begot sons and daughters, 
and died. 

26 And Tharra lived seventy years and begot Abram and 
Nachor and Arran. 

27 Now these are the generations of Tharra. Tharra be^ot 

28 Abram and Nachor and Arran ; and Arran begot Lot. And 
Arran died in the presence of his father Tharra in the land in 

29 which he was born in the country of the Chaldees. And Abram 
and Nachor took themselves wives. The name of Abram's 
wife was Sara, and the name of Nachor's wife, Malcha, a 
daughter of Arran, who was the father of Malcha and the fa- 

30 ther of Jescha. And Sara was barren and did not bear chil- 

31 dren. And Tharra took Abram his son and Lot the son of 
Arran, his grand son, and Sara his daughter in law, the wife of 
his son Abram, and led them out of the country of the Chal- 

32 dees to go to the land of Chanaan. But when they came to 
Charran he took up his abode there. And in the land of Char- 
ran, all the days of Tharra were two hundred and five years. 
And Tharra died in Charran. 

XII. Now the Lord said to Abram, Depart from thy land and 
from thy kindred and from the house of thy father and come 

2 to the land which I will shew thee, and I will make thee a great 

3 nation ; and I will bless thee and make thy name great, and 
thou shalt be blessed ; and I will bless them, who bless thee ; 
and those who curse thee I will curse : and by thee all the tribes 

4 of the earth shalt be blessed. So Abram went as the Lord 
commanded him, and Lot went with him. Now Abram was 

5 seventy five years old when he came out of Charran. And 
Abram took Sara his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all 
their substance which they possessed, and every living creature 
which they had, and set out from Charran to go to the land of 

6 Chanaan. And Abram travelled through the land length- 
wise till he came to the place of Sychem to the lofty Oak. 

7 Now the Chananites at that time inhabited that land. And the 
Lord appeared to Abram, and said to him, " To thy seed I 
will give this land." So Abram built there an altar to the Lord 

8 who appeared to him. And from that place he went to the 
mountain east of Baithel and there pitched his tent, having 

vol. i. c 



!-!-! XIII. GENESIS. 

Baithel on the west and Aggai on the east, and built there an 

9 altar to the Lord and invoked the name of the Lord. And 

Abram removed and proceeding forward encamped in the wil- 

10 derness. And there was a famine in the land, so Abram went 
down to Egypt to sojourn there, because the famine prevailed 

11 in the land. x\nd when Abram was near entering Egypt, he 
said to his wife Sara, I know that because thou art a beautiful 

12 woman, it will therefore come to pass that when the Egyptians 
see thee, they will say, She is his wife, and they will kill me ; 

13 but thee they will save alive. Say thou therefore, I am his sis- 
ter, that it may be well with me on thy account, and my life 

14 will be preserved for thy sake. So when Abram came into 
Egypt the Egyptians beheld his wife, for she was very beau- 

15 tiful ; and when the princes of Pharaoh saw her they praised 
her to Pharaoh, and she was brought to Pharaoh's house. 

16 And they treated Abram well for her sake, though he had 
sheep and oxen and asses and men servants and maid servants 

17 and mules and camels. But God visited Pharaoh and his fa- 
mily with great and grievous plagues because of Sara the wife 

18 of Abram. And Pharaoh called Abram and said, Why hast 
thou acted thus with me and didst not tell me that she is thy 

19 wife? Why didst thou say, She is my sister? I indeed took 
her to be my wife, but now there is thy wife before thee. 

20 Take her and begone. And Pharaoh gave strict orders to 
men touching Abram, to convoy away him and his wife and 
all that he had. So Abram w r ent up out of Egypt with his 
wife and all his substance, and Lot with him, into the wil- 
derness. 

XIII. Now Abram was very rich in cattle and in silver and 
gold, therefore he proceeded on to the place from which he 
had come into the wilderness, even to Baithel to the place 
where his tent formerly was, between Baithel and Aggai, to the 
place of the altar which he had there built at the first, and 
there Abram invoked the name of the Lord. 

5 Now Lot who accompanied Abram had flocks and herds 
and tents, so that the land would not admit of their living to- 

6 gether. Because their substance was great and the land did 
not admit of their living together, and there was quarreling 

7 between the herdsmen of Abram's cattle and the herdsmen of 



!-!-! XIV. GENESIS. 

Lot's cattle, and the Chananites and the Pherezites then inha- 

8 bited that land ; therefore Abram said to Lot, Let there be no 
quarreling between roe and thee, and between my herdsmen 

9 and thy herdsmen, for we are brethren. Behold is not the 
whole land before thee ? Separate from me. If thou incline 
to the left, I will take the right. Or if thou go to the right, I 

10 will go to the left. Then Lot raised his eyes and took a view 
of all the country bordering on the Jordan. For before God 
overthrew Sodom and Goraorra it was all watered till it 
reacheth Zogora, like the paradise of God, and like the land, 

11 of Egypt. So Lot chose for himself all the country bordering 
on the Jordan ; and Lot removed to the eastern border. And 

12 the brothers separated one from the other. And Abram dwelt 
in the land of Chanaan ; and Lot dwelt in a city of the bor- 

13 derers and pitched his tent among the Sodomites, though the 
men of Sodom were wicked and very great sinners in the sight 
of the Lord. 

14 And God said to Abram after Lot had separated from him, 
Kaise thy eyes and look from the place where thou now art, 

15 to the north and south and east and west. For all the land 
which thou seest I will give to thee and thy seed for ever. 

16 And I will make thy seed like the dust of the earth. If any 
can count the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed be num- 

17 bered. Arise and travel through the land, the length and 
the breadth thereof, for to thee I will give it and to thy seed 

18 for ever. Then Abram removed his tent and came and dwelt 
near the Oak of Mambre, which was by Chebron, and built 
there an altar to the Lord. 

XIV. And it came to pass in the reign of Amarphal king of 
Sennaar, and of Arioch king of Ellasar, that Chodollogomar 

2 king of Elam, and Thargal king of nations, made war on Balla 
king of Sodom, and on Barsa king of Gomorra, and on Sen- 
naar king of Adama, and Sumobor king of Seboeim, and the 

3 king of Balak which is Segor. All these met together on the 

4 salt vale, which is now the sea of salt. Twelve years they had 
served Chodollogomar, but in the thirteenth year they revolt- 

5 ed. And in the fourteenth year came Chodollogomar and the 
kings with him, and having subdued the giants in Astaroth 
and Ivarnain, and mighty nations with them, namely, the Om- 



!-!-! XIV. GENESIS. 

6 maians who dwelt in the city Save, and the Chorrites on the 
mountain of Seir as far as the pine grove of Pharan, which is 

7 in the wilderness, they turned and came to the fountain of 
Judgment, which is Kades, and smote the princes of Amalek 

8 and the Amorites, who dwelt in Asasonthamar. Then march- 
ed out the king of Sodom and the king of Goniorra and the 

9 king of Adama and the king of Seboeim and the king of Ba- 
lak, that is Segor, and drew up in array against them for bat- 
tle in the salt vale, against Chodollogomar king of Elam and 
Thargal king of nations, and Amarphal king of Sennaar, and 

10 Arioch king of Ellasar, four kings against five. Now in this 
salt vale there were wells of Asphaltus. And the king of So- 
dom and the king of Gomorra fled and fell there. And they 

11 who were left fled to the hilly country. And they took all the 
cavalry of Sodom and Gomorra and all their provisions and 

12 departed. They took also Lot, Abram's brother's son and his 
substance, when they went off, as he dwelt among the Sodo- 

13 mites. And one of them who escaped, came and told Abram, 
the traveller, who then dwelt near the oak grove of Mambre 
the Amorite, the brother of Eschol, and the brother of Au- 

14 nan, who were in alliance with Abram. And when Abram 
heard that his nephew Lot was carried away captive, he num- 
bered his domestics, three hundred and eighteen men, and 

15 pursued them to Dan. And in the night he and his servants fell 
upon them and smote them, and pursued them even to Choba, 

16 on the left of Damascus. And he brought back all the cavalry 
of the Sodomites. He brought back also his nephew Lot and 

17 all his substance and the women and the people. And on his re- 
turn from the slaughter of Chodollogomar and the kings who 
were with him, the king of Sodom went out to meet him, to the 

18 valley of Sabu which was the king's dale. Melchisedek also the 
king of Salem carried out bread and wine. Now he was a priest 

19 of the most High God, and he blessed Abram, and said, May 
Abram be blessed by God the Most High, who created the 

20 heaven and the earth : And blessed be God the Most High who 

21 hath delivered thy enemies into thy hands. And Abram gave 
him a tenth of all. And the king of Sodom said to Abram, 

22 Give me the men, but take the horses for thyself. Whereupon 
Abram said to the king of Sodom, With this uplifted hand of 



!-!-! KV. GENESIS. 

23 mine I swear by the Lord the God Most High, who created 
the heaven and the earth, that of all which belong to thee I will 

24 not take from a thread to a shoe latchet ; that thou mayest not 
say, I have made Abram rich ; save only what the young men 
have eaten, and the portion of these men who went with 
me, namely, Eschol, Aunan, Mambre. Let them take a por- 
tion. 

XV. After these things a word of the Lord came to Abram in 
a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram, I protect thee. Thy reward 

2 shall be exceedingly great. Whereupon Abram said, sove- 
reign Lord, what wilt thou give me, seeing I die childless, and 

3 the son of Masek my servant, this Damascus Eliezer — Then 
xVbram said, seeing thou hast not given me seed, this servant 

4 of mine is to be my heir. And immediately there came a voice 
of the Lord to him saying, He shall not be thy heir : but one 

5 who shall spring from thee shall be thy heir. Then he led him 
out and said to him, Look up now to the heaven and count the 

6 stars if thou canst number them. Then he said, So shall thy 
seed be. And Abram believed God and it was counted to him 

7 for righteousness. Then he said to him, I am the God who 
brought thee out of the country of the Chaldees, that I might 

8 give thee this land to inherit it. Whereupon he said, sove- 

9 reign Lord, how shall I know that I shall inherit it ? And the 
Lord said to him, " Take for me a heifer of three years old and 
a she goat three years old and a ram three years old and a tur- 

10 tie dove and a pidgeon." So he took for him all these and divid- 
ed them in halves and placed the halves opposite to one another, 

11 but the birds he did not divide; but the birds alighted on the 
carcases, on the two halves of them, and Abram sat down with 

12 them. And at the going down of the sun an ecstacy came on 
Abram, and lo ! a great gloomy horror falleth upon him, and 

13 it was said to Abram, Know assuredly that thy seed shall so- 
journ in a land not their own. And they shall be enslaved and 

1-1 afflicted and humbled. Four hundred years. But the nation which 
they shall serve I will judge. And after that they shall come 

15 out hither with much wealth. Thou indeed shalt go to thy fa- 

16 thers in peace, having been nourished in a good old age. And 
in the fourth generation they shall be brought back hither. For 

17 the sins of the Amorites have not yet come to the full. And as 



!-!-! XVI. GENESIS. 

the sun was setting there was a flash of fire, and lo ! a smok- 
ing furnace and lamps of fire passed between the halved parts. 

18 On that day the Lord made a covenant with Abram saying, 

19 "To thy seed I will give this land from the river of Egypt to the 
great river Euphrates, the Ivenites and the Kenezites, and 

20 the Kedmonites and the Chettites and the Pherezites and the 

21 Eaphaeims and the Amorites and the Chananites and the Evites 
and the Gergesites and the Jebusites. 

XYI. Still Sara, the wife of Abram, did not bear him children ; 

2 so having an Egyptian servant whose name was Agar, Sara 
said to Abram, Behold the Lord hath shut me up that I may not 

3 bear. Go in therefore to my maid that I may have children by 
her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sara. And Sara the 
wife of Abram took Agar her Egyptian maid, after Abram had 
dwelt ten years in the land of Chanaan, and gave her to Abram 

4 her husband to be his wife. And he went in unto Agar and she 
conceived. And when she saw that she was with child, her mis- 

5 tress was contemptible in her sight. Whereupon Sara said to 
Abram, I am injured on thy account. I gave thee this maid of 
mine into thy bosom, and when she seeth that she is with child, 

6 I am contemptible in her sight. God judge between me and 
thee. And Abram said to Sara, Behold thy maid is in thy 
hands, treat her as it seemeth good to thee. Thereupon Sara 

7 treated her harshly, and she fled from her presence. But an 
' angel of the Lord found her at the fountain of water in the wil- 

8 derness — at the fountain in the way to Sour. And the angel of 
the Lord said to her, Agar, thou servant of Sara, whence 
comest thou and whither art thou going ? And she said I am 

9 fleeing from the face of my mistress Sara. And the angel of 
the Lord said to her, Return to thy mistress and submit to her 

10 authority. Moreover the angel of the Lord said to her, I will 
multiply thy seed so that it shall not be numbered on account 

11 of the multitude of it. Furthermore the angel of the Lord said 
to her, Behold thou art with child, and thou shalt bear a son 
and shalt call his name Ismael ; for the Lord hath hearkened to 

12 thy affliction. He will be a wild man. His hands will be against all, 

13 and the hands of all, against him. And he shall dwell in front 
of all his brethren." So she called the name of the Lord who 
spoke to her, "Thou the God who lookest upon me;" for said 



Oh. XVII. GENESIS. 

II she, I saw plainly hiin who appeared to ine ; for this cause 
15 she called the well, The well before which I saw. Lo ! it is be- 
tween Kades and Barad. And Agar bore Abrarn a son; and 
Abram called his son whom Agar bore to him Ismael. 
XVII. Now Abram was eighty six years old when Agar bore Ismael 
1 to Abram. And when Abram was ninety nine years old the 
Lord appeared to Abram and said to him, " I am thy God. 
'1 Be well pleasing in my sight, and be blameless and I will 
establish that covenant of mine between me and thee and 
3 multiply thee exceedingly." Whereupon Abram fell on his face, 
I and God spake to him saying, " On my part lo ! this is my co- 

5 venant with thee, Thou shalt be the father of a multitude of na- 
tions, and thy name shall no more be called Abram but thy name, 
shall be Abraham ; because I have made thee the father of many 

6 nations : And I will increase thee exceedingly, and cause thee to 

7 become nations ; and kings shall spring from thee : And I will es- 
tablish this my covenant with thee and thy seed after thee, through- 
out their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be thy God 

8 and the God of thy seed after thee. And I will give thee and 
thy seed after thee this land in which thou sojournest ; even all 
the land of Ohanaan for an everlasting possession, and I will be 

9 their God." Moreover God said to Abraham, " On thy part 
thou shalt keep this my covenant; thou and thy seed after thee 

10 throughout their generations. And this is the covenant which 
thou shalt keep between me and you, even thy seed after thee 
throughout their generations, Evert/ male of you shall be cir- 

11 cumcised. Ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and 

12 it shall be for a sign of the covenant between me and you. And 
the child of eight days old shall be circumcised among you. 
Every male throughout your generations, including the home 
born servant, and him who is bought with money from any 

13 stranger, not of thy seed. Thy home born servant and he who is 
bought shall surely be circumcised. And this my covenant shall 

14 be on your flesh for an everlasting covenant. And with regard 
to the uncircumcised male, the flesh of whose foreskin shall 
not be circumcised on the eighth day, that soul shall be cut off 
from its family, because it hath broken my covenant." 

15 Moreover God said to Abraham, " Sara thy wife shall not 

16 be called Sara. Her name shall be Sarah. And I will bless her 
and give thee a son by her. And I will bless him. And he shall 



!-!-! XVIII. GENESIS. 

17 become nations, and from him there shall be kings of nations." 
Upon this Abraham fell on his face and smiled, and said in his 

18 heart, To him who is in his hundredth year shall a son be born ? 

19 and shall Sarah bring forth in her ninetieth year? And Abra- 
ham said to God, Let this Ismael live before thee. Whereupon 
God said to Abraham, Nay, behold Sarah thy wife shall bear 
thee a son, and thou shalt call his name Isaak. And I will 
establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant to 

20 be his God and the God of his seed after him. And as for Is- 
mael, lo ! I have hearkened to thee and behold I have blessed 
him, and I will increase him and multiply him exceedingly. 
He shall beget twelve nations, and I will make him a great na- 

21 tion. But this covenant of mine I will establish with Isaak whom 
Sarah shall bear about this time next year." 

22 And when God had finished talking with him, and bad 

23 ascended from him, Abraham took his son Ismael and all the 
servants born in his family and all those who were bought with 
money, even every male of the men in Abraham's family and cir- 
cumcised their foreskins that very day, as God had ordered 

24 him. Now Abraham was ninety nine years old when he was 

25 circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. And Ismael his son 
was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of 

26 his foreskin. In one and the same clay were circumcised Abra- 
ham and his son Ismael and all the men of his household, both 
his home born servants and those bought from foreign nations. 

XVIII. Again God appeared to him at the Oak grove of Mambre. 
As he was sitting at the door of his tent at noon, he raised his eyes 

2 and looked, and lo ! three men stood above him. And when he saw 
them he ran to meet them from the door of his tent ; and having 

3 made obeisance to the ground, he said, My Lord, if I have 

4 found favour in thy sight, pass not by thy servant. Let water, I 
pray thee, be brought and let your feet be washed ; and re- 

5 fresh yourselves under this tree ; and I will fetch bread that 
you may eat. And after that you may proceed on your jour- 
ney, in as much as you have turned aside to your servant. 

6 Whereupon he said, Do as thou hast said. Then Abraham 
hastened into the tent to Sarah, and said to her, Haste, and mix 
up three measures of fine flour and make cakes on the hearth. 

7 Then Abraham ran to the herd and took a calf tender and good 



Cb. XVIII. GENESIS. 

8 and gave it to a servant and urged hirn to dress it quickly. And 
he took butter and milk and tbe calf which be bad dressed and 
set it before them, and they ate, and be stood by them under the 

9 tree. And be said to Abraham, Where is Sarah thy wife ? And 

10 Abraham said, Behold ! in the tent. Then he said, I will return 
and come to thee about this time twelve month, and Sarah thy wife 

11 will have a son. And Sarah heard, being at the door of the tent 
behind them. (Now Abraham and Sarah were far advanced in life, 
and it had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.) 

12 And Sarah smiled within herself, saying, It hath never been 

13 so with me even to this time, and my lord is old. And the Lord 
said to Abraham, Why did Sarah smile within herself, saying, 

14 Shall I indeed bring forth ? I who am old ? Can any thing be 
impossible with God ? About this time twelve month I will re- 

15 turn to thee, and Sarah shall have a son. Then Sarah denied, 
saying, I did not smile, for she was terrified. And he said to 
her, Nay, but thou didst smile. 

16 Then the men arose and directed their course towards 
Sodom and Gomorra, and Abraham went with them to conduct 

17 them on the way. And the Lord said, Shall I hide from my 

18 servant Abraham, what I am going to do ? Abraham shall in- 
deed become a nation great and numerous ; and by him all the 

19 nations of the earth are to be blessed. For I know that he will 
command his children and his household after him, who are to 
keep the ways of the Lord, to execute judgment and justice, 
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham all that he hath spoken 
to him. 

20 Then the Lord said, The cry of Sodom and Gomorra 
hath been multiplied before me, and their sins are exceedingly 

21 great, therefore I am come down to see whether they do to 
each other according to the cry which is come to me ; and if 

22 not, that I may know. Now the men had turned thence aud 
were gone on to Sodom, but Abraham was still standing before 

23 the Lord. And Abraham drew near and said, Thou wouldst 
not destroy a righteous with a wicked man ! Shall a righteous 

24 man be as the wicked ? Should there be fifty righteous men in 
the city, wilt thou destroy them? Wilt thou not spare the 
whole city for the sake of fifty righteous, if they be there? 

25 Thou canst not do such a thing as this to slay the righteous 

VOL. I. D 



!-!-! XIX. GENESIS. 

with the wicked. Shall the righteous be as the wicked ? No, no ; 
Thou who judgest the whole earth ; wilt not thou execute 

26 judgment? And the Lord said, If there be among the Sodo- 
mites fifty righteous men in the city, I will spare the whole 

27 city and the whole place for their sake. Then Abraham an- 
swered and said, Now I have taken upon me to speak to my 
Lord, I who am but dust and ashes ! But if the fifty righteous 
be lessened to forty five wilt thou for want of the five destroy 

28 the whole city ? And he said, I will not destroy it, if I find 

29 there forty five. And Abraham proceeded farther to speak to 

30 him and said, But if there be found there forty ? And he said 
For the sake of the forty I will not destroy it. Then Abra- 
ham said, Wilt thou, Lord, be offended if I speak? But if 

31 there be found there thirty ? And he said, I will not; destroy 
it, for the sake of the thirty. Again Abraham said, Since I 
am permitted to speak to the Lord, If twenty be found there ? 

32 And he said I will not destroy it, if I find twenty there. And 
Abraham said, Wilt thou, Lord, be offended, if I speak yet 
once more ? But if ten be found there ? And he said, For 
the sake of ten I will not destroy it. Then the Lord having 
done speaking to Abraham departed, and Abraham returned to 
his place. 

XIX. Now in the evening the two angels came to Sodom, and 
Lot was sitting at the gate of Sodom, and upon seeing them, 
Lot arose to meet them, and made obeisance with his face to 

2 the ground, and said, I intreat you, my lords, turn aside to 
the house of your servant and tarry all night, and wash your 
feet, and rising early in the morning, you may proceed on 

3 your journey. And they said, No, we will lodge in the street. 
Then he pressed them, and they went home with him. And 
when they came to his house, he made an entertainment for 
them ; and baked for them unleavened cakes, and they did eat. 

4 But before they went to rest, the men of the city, the Sodo- 
mites, surrounded the house, both young and old — all the 

5 people in a body. And they called out Lot and said to him, 
Where are the men who came to thee this night ? Bring them 

6 out to us that we may know them. Whereupon Lot went out to 

7 them into the porch and shut the door after him : And he said 
to them, You must not brethren, commit such wickedness. 



Oh. XIX. GENESIS. 

8 I have two daughters who have not known man ; Let me bring 
out these to you, and use them as you please ; only do no injury 
to these men in as much as they have come under the shelter of 

9 my roof. And they said to him, Begone there ! Thou earnest 
to sojourn, didst thou also, to be our judge ? Now therefore 
we will treat thee worse than them. And they pressed vio- 
lently against the man, Lot ; and came near to break open the 

10 door. Then the men stretched forth their hands and pulled Lot 
to them into the house and shut the door of the house, and 

11 smote with blindness the men who were at the door of the 
house, both small and great, so that they were tired seeking 

12 the door. Then the men said to Lot, Hast thou here sons in 
law, or sons or daughters ? or if thou hast any other in this city 
take them out of this place, for we are going to destroy this 

13 place. For their cry is come up before the Lord, and the Lord 

14 hath sent us to destroy it. Upon this Lot went out and spoke 
to his sons in law, who had bethrothed his daughters and said, 
Arise and depart from this place ; for the Lord is going to 
destroy this city. But he seemed to his sons in law to be 

15 mocking. Now when it was break of day the angels hurried 
Lot, saying, Arise and take thy wife and thy two daughters 
whom thou hast, and get away, lest thou also perish for the 

16 iniquities of this city. But they were confounded. So the 
angels took hold of his hand, and the hand of his wife, and the 

17 hands of his two daughters, as the Lord spared him. And 
having led them out they said, Escape for thy life. Look not 
back, nor stop in any part of the plain around. Escape to the 

18 mountains, lest peradventure thou be overtaken. Thereupon 

19 Lot said to them, I beseech thee, Lord, since thy servant 
hath found favour in thy sight and thou hast magnified thy 

20 kindness in what thou dost for me to save my life. I cannot 
escape to the mountains. Peradventure the calamity may over- 
take me and I shall die. Behold that city is nigh for me to flee 
to. It is little and thither I can escape. Is it not little ? And 

21 my soul shall live by thy means. And he said, Behold I have 
indulged thee also in this matter, so as not to destroy that city 

22 of which thou hast spoken. Haste therefore to escape thither ; 
for I cannot do any thing till thou get there. For this cause 
he called the name of that city, Segor. 



!-!-! XX. GENESIS. 

23 The sun was risen on the earth when Lot entered Segor ; 

24 and the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorra brimstone 

25 and fire from the Lord out of heaven. And he overthrew 
these cities, and all the circumjacent country, and all the inha- 
bitants of those cities, and all the productions of the ground. 

2(3 And Lot's wife having looked back was turned into a pillar 
of salt. 

27 And Abraham went early in the morning to the place, 

28 where he had stood before the Lord, and he looked towards 
Sodom and Gomorra and towards the circumjacent plain, and 
he beheld and lo ! a flame ascended out of the earth like the 

29 smoke of a furnace. But when God destroyed all the cities of 
that neighbourhood he remembered Abraham, and sent Lot 
out from that destruction. 

Now when the Lord had destroyed those cities in which 

30 Lot had dwelt, Lot went up out of Segor, and he and his two 
daughters with him settled in the mountains ; for he was afraid 
to dwell in Segor. So he and his two daughters with him took 

31 up their abode in a cave. And the elder said to the younger, 
Our father is old and there is none in this land who will come 

32 in unto us, as is customary in all the earth. Come, let us make 
our father drink wine, and we will lie with him that we may 

33 raise up seed from our father. So they made their father drink 
wine that very night, and the elder having gone in lay with her 
father that night, and he knew not when she lay down, nor when 

34 she arose. And on the next night the elder said to the young- 
er, Lo ! I lay with our father last night, let us make him drink 
wine this night also, and do thou go in and lie with him and 

35 let us raise up seed from our father. So they made their father 
drink wine that night also, and the younger went in and lay 
with her father ; and he knew not when she lay down, nor when 

36 she arose. Thus the two daughters of Lot conceived by their 

37 father. And the eldest bore a son and called his name 3Foab, 
saying From my father. He is the father of the present 3Ioa- 

38 bites. And the youngest also bore a son and called his name 
Amman saying, Son of the same as I. He is the father of the 
present Ammanites. 

XX. Now Abraham had removed thence into the south country, 
and made his abode between Kades and Sour, and sojourned 






!-!-! XX. GENESIS. 

2 among the Gerarites. And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, 
She is my sister. For he was afraid to say, She is my wife, 

3 lest the men of the city should kill him on her account. And 
Abimelech the king of the Gerarites sent and took Sarah. And 
God came to Abimelech in a dream by night and said, Behold 
thou diest for this woman, whom thou hast taken ; for 

4 she is the man's wife. Now Abimelech had not touched 
her. And Abimelech said, Lord, wilt thou destroy an un- 

5 knowing and righteous nation ? Did he not tell me, She is my 
sister ? And did not she say to me, He is my brother ? With 

6 a pure heart and innocent hands I have done this. And God 
said to him in a dream, I know indeed that with a pure heart 
thou hast done this, and out of compassion I withheld thee from 

7 sinning against me. For this cause I suffered thee not to touch 
her. Now therefore restore the man his wife ; for he is a pro- 
phet ; and he will pray for thee and thou shalt live. But if thou 
restore not, be assured that thou and all belonging to thee 

8 shall die. And Abirnelech arose early next morning and called 
all his servants and related all these things in their hearing. 

9 And all the men were exceedingly terrified. Then Abimelech 
sent for Abraham and said to him, Why hast thou dealt thus 
with us ? Have we in any respect sinned against thee, that thou 
shouldst bring upon me and upon my kingdom this great sin ? 

10 Thou hast done to me what no one should do. Moreover 
Abimelech said to Abraham, What didst thou see that thou 

1 1 shouldst do this ? And Abraham said, I indeed thought, as 
there is no worship of God in this place, they will kill me for 

12 my wife's sake. And indeed of a truth she is my sister by the 
same father but not of the same mother, so she became my wife. 

13 And when God led me out from my father's house I said to 
her, Thou wilt do me this kindness. To what place soever we 

14 come say of me, He is my brother. Then Abimelech took, a 
thousand didrachms and sheep and oxen and men servants 
and maid servants and gave them to Abraham, and restored to 

15 him Sarah his wife. And Abimelech said to Abraham, Behold 

16 my land is before thee ; dwell wherever it may please thee. And 
to Sarah he said, Behold 1 have given thy brother a thou- 
sand didrachms. Let these therefore be for thee to adorn thy 
countenance and for all the women with thee. ^Iake thou 



!-!-! XXL GENESIS. 

17 therefore all things hereafter accord with truth. Then Abra- 
ham prayed to God ; and God healed Abinielech and his wife 

18 and his maid servants and they Lore children. For the Lord 
had shut up every womb in Abimelech's family on the account 
of Sarah the wife of Abraham. 

XXI. Now the Lord visited Sarah as he had said. And the Lord 

2 did for Sarah as he had spoken, and she conceived and bare a 
son to Abraham in old age at the set time, of which the Lord 

3 had spoken to him. And Abraham called the name of his son 

4 who was born to him, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaak. And 
Abraham circumcised Isaak on the eighth day, as God had com- 

5 manded him. Now Abraham was a hundred years old when 
(3 his son Isaak was born to him. And Sarah said, The Lord 

hath made laughter for me ; for whoever shall hear will rejoice 

7 with me. And she said, Who will tell Abraham that Sarah is 

8 suckling a child — that I have born a son in my old age ! And 
the child grew and was weaned and Abraham made a great en- 

9 tertainment on the day his son Isaak was weaned. And when 
Sarah saw the son of Agar the Egyptian who was born to 
Abraham sporting with her son Isaak, she said to Abraham, 

10 Send away this girl and her son ; for the son of this girl shall 

11 not be heir with my son Isaak. And the thing appeared very 

12 hard in Abraham's view, touching his son. But God said to 
Abraham, Let not this respecting thy son and respecting the 
handmaid appear hard in thy view. Hearken to the voice of 

13 Sarah in whatever she may have said to thee. For in Isaak a 
seed shall be called for thee. Nevertheless I will make the son 

14 of this handmaid a great nation, because he is thy seed. So 
Abraham arose early the next morning and took loaves and a 
skin full of water, and when he had put them on her shoulder 
he gave the boy to Agar and sent her away. And she departing 

15 lost her way between the wilderness and Well of the Oath ; And 
the water in the skin being spent she laid the boy under the 
first pine tree and going away sat down over against him at the 

16 distance of about a bow shot. For she said, I cannot behold the 
death of my son. So she sat over against him and the lad wept 

17 with a loud voice. And God heard the voice of the lad from 
the place where he was. And an angel of God called to Agar 
out of heaven and said, What is the matter, Agar ? Fear not. 



!-!-! XXII. GENESIS. 

For God hath heard the voice of the lad from the place where 

18 he is. Arise and take up the boy and support him with thy 

19 hand ; for I will make him a great nation. And God opened 
her eyes and she saw a well of spring water. So she went and 

20 filled the vessel with water and gave the boy drink. And God 
was with the lad and he grew and dwelt in the wilderness and 

21 became a bowman. Thus he dwelt in the wilderness, and his 
mother took for him a wife from Pharan of Egypt. 

22 Now it happened at that time that Abimelech, accompanied 
with Ochozath his chamberlain and Phichol the general of his 

23 army, spoke to Abraham saying, God is with thee in all that 
thou dost. Now therefore swear to me by God, that thou wilt 
not injure me nor my seed nor my name ; but that according 
to the kindness with which I have treated thee, thou wilt deal 

24 with me and this land in which thou hast sojourned. And Abra- 

25 ham said, I swear. Then Abraham expostulated with Abime- 
lech touching the wells of water which the servants of Abime- 

26 lech had taken. And Abimelech said to him, I did not know 
that any one had done this to thee. Thou didst not tell me, nor 

27 did I hear of it till this day. Then Abraham took sheep and 
oxen and gave them to Abimelech ; and they both made a co- 

28 venant. Now Abraham had set seven ewe lambs by them- 

29 selves ; And Abimelech said to Abraham, What are these se- 

30 ven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves ? Upon which 
Abraham said, These seven ewe lambs thou wilt take of me 
that they may be a witness for me, that I digged this well. 

31 For this cause he called the name of that place, Well of the 
Oath, because both of them swore there and made a covenant 

32 at Well of the Oath. Then arose Abimelech and Ochozath his 
chamberlain and Phichol the general of his army and returned 

33 to the land of the Philistines ; and Abraham planted a field at 
Well of the Oath and there invoked the name of the Lord, the 

34 everlasting God. And Abraham sojourned many days in the 
land of the Philistines. 

XXII. And it came to pass after these things that God tried 

Abraham and said to him, Abraham ! xVbraham ! And he said, 

2 Here I am. And he said, Take thy son, thy dear son whom thou 

hast loved — Isaak; and go to the hilly country and offer him up 

there for a whole homage offering on one of the hills which I 



!-!-! XXII. GENESIS. 

3 will point out to thee. So Abraham arose in the morning and 
saddled his ass and took with him two servants and his son 
Isaak : and having split wood for the whole homage offering he 
set out on the journey and came to the place which God 

4 told him on the third day. Now when Abraham raised his eyes 

5 and saw the place at a distance he said to his servants, Stay 
here with the ass, and I and the lad will go yonder, and when 

6 we have worshipped we will return to you. Then Abraham 
took the wood of the whole homage offering and laid it on his 
son Isaak ; and he took in his hand the fire and the knife, and 

7 they both proceeded on together. And Isaak said to his father 
Abraham, Father. And he said, What is the matter, son ? 
And Isaak said, Here is the fire and the wood ; where is the 

8 sheep for a whole homage offering ? And Abraham said, My 
son ! God will provide for himself a sheep for a whole homage 

9 offering. So they both proceeded on together and came to the 
place which God told him. And Abraham built there the altar, 
and placed thereon the wood ; and having bound his son Isaak 

10 he laid him on the altar above the wood. And when Abraham 
stretched forth his hand to take hold of the knife to slay his 

11 son, the angel of the Lord called to him out of heaven and said, 

12 Abraham ! Abraham ! And he said, Here I am. And he said, 
Lay not thy hand on the lad, nor do any thing to him ; for now 
I know that thou fearest God and on my account hast not spared 

13 thy darling son. Then Abraham raised his eyes and looked, and 
lo ! a ram caught by the horns in a sabek bush. And Abraham 
went and took the ram and offered him up for an homage offer- 

14 ing instead of his son Isaak. And Abraham called the name of 
that place, The Lord hath seen, that at this day they might 

15 say, On this mountain, The Lord was seen. Then the angel 

16 of the Lord called to Abraham a second time out of heaven, 

17 saying, By myself I have sworn, saith the Lord, Because 
thou hast done this, and for my sake hast not spared thy beloved 
son ; with blessings I will indeed bless thee ; and I will multi- 
ply thy seed abundantly as the stars of heaven and as the sand 
on the sea shore : and thy seed shall inherit the cities of their 

18 adversaries ; and by the seed of thee all the nations of the earth 
shall be blessed, because thou hast hearkened to my voice. 

19 Then Abraham returned to his servants and they arose and 



!-!-! XXIII. GENESIS. 

came together to Well of the Oath, for Abraham lived at Well 

20 of the Oath. And after these things it was told Abraham say- 
ing, With regard to Melcha, behold she also hath born sons to 

21 thy brother Nachor, Ouz the first born, and Banx his brother, 

22 and Hamnel, the father of the Syrians, and Chazad and Azau, 

23 and Phaldes and Jeldaph and Bathuel ; and Bathnel begot Ke- 
bekka. These were the eight sons, whom Melcha bore to Na- 

24 chor the brother of Abraham. And his concnbine whose name 
was Eeuma bore also Tabek and Gaani and Tochos and Mo- 
cha. 

XXIII. Now the life of Sarah was a hundred and twenty seven 

2 years. And Sarah died in the city Arbok, which is in the vale, 
the same is Chebron in the land of Chanaan. And Abraham went 

3 to mourn for Sarah and to make lamentation. And Abraham 
arose from before his dead and spoke to the children of Chet, 

4 saying, I am a stranger and sojourner among you, give me 
therefore the possession of a burying place among you, that I 

5 may bury my dead from before me. And the children of Chet 
answered and said to Abraham, Nay, Sir, rather hearken to us. 

6 Thou art a king from God among us. In the choice of our 
tombs bury thy dead ; for there is none of us who will deny 

7 thee his tomb to bury there thy dead. Then Abraham stand- 
ing up made obeisance to the people of the land — the children 

8 of Chet. And Abraham spoke to them saying, If it be your 
wish that I should bury this my dead out of my sight, hearken 

9 to me and speak for me to Ephron the son of Saar. And let him 
give me the double cave which belongeth to him — that which 
is in a part of his field. Let him give it to me for the full value 

10 of it, among you, for a possession of a burying place. Now 
Ephron was sitting among the children of Chet ; And Ephron 
the Chettite answered Abraham and said in the hearing of the 
children of Chet and of all coming into the city, Attend, Sir, 

11 and hearken to me. The field and the cave which is in it I give 
thee. In the presence of my fellow citizens I have given them 

12 to thee. Bury thy dead. And when Abraham had made obei- 
sance before all the people of the land, he said to Ephron in the 

13 hearing of all the people of the land, As thou art here before 
me, hearken to me. Take of me in silver the value of the field 

14 and I will bury my dead there. Whereupon Ephron answered 

VOL. I. E 



Oh. XXIV. GENESIS. 

15 Abraham, saying, Nay, Sir, I have indeed heard that the land 
is worth four hundred didrachms of silver ; but what can that 

16 be between me and thee ? But bury thou thy dead. And Abra- 
ham hearkened to Ephron ; and Abraham paid down to Ephron 
the money which he mentioned in the hearing of the children 
of Chet, four hundred didrachms of silver current among mer- 

17 chants. So the field of Ephron including the double cave which 
is situate before Mambre, the field and the cave in it and all the 
wood in the field and all within the bounds thereof round about 

18 were conveyed to Abraham for a possession in the presence of 

19 the children of Chet and of all who entered the city. After this 
Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the double cave of the field 
which is over against Mambre (the same is Chebron in the land 

20 of Chanaan.) And the property of the field and the cave in it 
was confirmed to Abraham for a possession of a burying place 
by the children of Chet. 

XXIV. Now Abraham was old and far advanced in years, and the 

2 Lord had blessed him in all things. And Abraham said to his 
servant, the oldest of his family and who was ruler over all 

3 that he had, Put thy hand under my thigh, and let me cause 
thee to swear by the Lord the God of heaven and the God of 
earth, that thou wilt not take a wife for my son Isaak, of the 

4 daughters of the Chananites among whom I dwell ; but that 
thou wilt go to the land where I was born, and to my tribe and 

5 take thence a wife for my son Isaak. And the servant said to 
him, Perhaps the woman will not be willing to come with me 

6 to this land ; shall I take back thy son to the land from which 
thou earnest ? Whereupon Abraham said to him, Beware that 

7 thou take not back my son thither. The Lord, the God of hea- 
ven and the God of earth, who took me from my father's house 
and from the land of my nativity ; who spoke to me, and who 
sware to me saying, " To thee I will give this land and to thy 
seed ; " he will send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take 

8 thence a wife for my son. But if the woman will not come 
with thee into this land, thou shalt be absolved from this my oath, 

9 save that thou must not take my son back thither. Then the 
servant put his hand under his master Abraham's thigh, and 

10 swore to him respecting this matter. And the servant took ten 
camels of the camels of his master ; and of all the goods of his 



!-!-! XXIV. GENESIS. 

master which were in his charge, and arose and went to Me- 

11 sopotainia to the city of Nachor. And he made his camels lie 
down without the city, by the well of water, in the evening, 

12 when the women come out to draw water ; and said, Lord 
the God of my master Abraham, prosper the way before me 

13 this day ; and shew thy kindness to my master Abraham. Be- 
hold I stand by this well of water and the daughters of the in- 

14 habitants of the city will come out to draw water. Now let the 
virgin to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher that I may 
drink ; and who shall say, Drink thou, and I will give water al- 
so to thy camels till they have all done drinking ; let her be 
the woman whom thou hast provided for thy servant Isaak. 
And by this I shall know that thou hast dealt mercifully with 

15 my master Abraham. And before he had finished this mental 
speech, lo ! Eebekka the daughter of Bathuel, the son of Mel- 
cha, the wife of Nachor, Abraham's brother, came out with 

1G her pitcher on her shoulder. Now the damsel was of a very 
beautiful countenance and was a virgin. No man had known 
her. So when she had gone down to the well and filled her 

17 pitcher and came up, the servant ran to meet her and said, Let 

18 me drink a little water out of thy pitcher. Upon which she 
said, Drink, my lord, and hastened to let down the pitcher on 

19 her arm and let him drink till he was satisfied. Then she said, 
I will draw water for thy camels also until they shall have all 

20 drunk. And she hasted and emptied the pitcher into the wa- 
tering trough and ran to the well to draw more and drew water 

21 for all the camels. And the man observed her attentively and 
held his peace, that he might know whether the Lord had 

22 prospered his journey or not. And when all the camels had 
done drinking, the man took ear rings of gold of about a drachm 
weight, and a pair of bracelets for her hands, the weight of 
which was ten pieces of gold, and he asked her saying, Whose 

23 daughter art thou ? Tell me, Is there room at thy father's house 

24 for us to lodge ? And she said, I am the daughter of Bathuel, 

25 the son of Melcha, whom she bore to Nachor. Moreover she 
said to him, We have plenty of straw and provender and room 

26 to lodge in. Then the man being satisfied, worshipped the 
Lord and said, Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abra- 
ham, who hath not withdrawn his kindness and his truth from 



Cb. XXIV. GENESIS. 

27 my master. The Lord hath indeed given me a prosperous 

28 journey to the house of my master's brother. Upon this the 
damsel ran to her mother's house and told all these things. 

29 Now Kebekka had a brother whose name was Laban. And La- 

30 ban ran out to the man at the well. When he saw the ear rings 
and bracelets in his sister's hands and heard all the words of 

31 Eebekka his sister, saying, Thus spake the man to me, he went 
to the man who was standing by his camels at the well and said 
to him, Come in, thou blessed of the Lord, why hast thou tar- 

32 ried without? I have the house ready and a place for the ca- 
mels. So the man went in to the family, and Laban unsaddled 
the camels, and gave straw and provender to the camels, and 
water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with 

33 him, and set bread before them to eat. But the man said I can- 
not eat till I have told my business. And Laban said, speak. 

34 Thereupon the man said, I am Abraham's servant, The Lord 
indeed hath blessed my master exceedingly, so that he is be- 

35 come great. He hath given him flocks and herds and silver 
and gold, men servants and maid servants, camels and asses. 

36 And Sarah, the wife of my master, hath born one son to my 
master when he was old, and he hath given him all that be- 

37 longed to him. And my master made me sware saying, Thou 
shalt not take a wife for my son from among the daughters of 

38 the Chananites in whose land I sojourn; but thou shalt go to 
the house of my father and to my tribe and take thence a 

39 wife for my son. Whereupon I said to my master, Perhaps 

40 the woman will not come with me. And he said to me, The Lord 
God, to whom I have been well pleasing in his sight, will send 
his angel with thee, and make thy journey prosperous, and 
thou shalt take a wife for my son from my tribe and from my 

41 father's house. On this condition only thou shalt be absolved 
from my curse ; when thou hast gone to my tribe, if they will 

42 not give thee, then shalt thou be clear from my oath. Xow, 
when I came to day to the well, I said, Lord the God of my 
master Abraham, if thou prosperest the journey in which I am 

43 now engaged, Behold I have stopped at this well of water, and 
the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw 

44 water, Let the virgin to whom I shall say, Let me drink a little 
water out of thy pitcher ; and who shall say to me, Drink thou, 



!-!-! XXIV. GENESIS. 

and I will draw water for thy camels ; Let her be the wife whom 
the Lord hath provided for his servant Isaak ; and by this I 
shall know that thon hast dealt mercifully with my master 

45 Abraham. And before I had finished this my address in thought, 
straightway Kebekka came with the pitcher on her shoulder 
and went down to the well and drew water, and I said to her, 

46 Let me drink. Upon which she speedily let down the pitcher on 
herarm, and said, Drink thou, and I will water thy camels. So 
I drank. And when she had watered the camels, I asked her 

47 saying, Whose daughter art thou ? Tell me. And she said, I am 
the daughter of Bathuel the son of Nachor, whom Melcha bore 
to him. Then I put the ear rings on her and the bracelets on 

48 her hands, and being well pleased, I worshipped the Lord and 
blessed the Lord the God of my master Abraham, who had 
prospered me in the right way to take the daughter of my 

49 master's brother for his son. Now therefore, if you deal kindly 
and truly with my master, tell me. If not, tell me ; that I may 

50 turn either to the right or left. In reply to which, Laban and 
Bathuel said, This matter hath proceeded from the Lord. We 

51 cannot gainsay thee, be it good or bad. Behold Rebekka is 
before thee. Take her and go and let her be the wife of thy 

52 master's son, as the Lord hath spoken. And when Abraham's 
servant heard these words, he worshipped the Lord on the 

58 ground. Then the servant brought out jewels of silver and gold 
and raiment and gave them to Bebekka, and made presents to 

54 her brother and to her mother. And when he and the men 
who were with him had eaten and drank, they went to rest. 
And he arose early next morning and said, Dismiss me that 

55 I may return to my master. But her brother and her mother 
said, Let the damsel stay with us about ten days and then she 

56 shall go. And he said to them, Do not detain me, seeing the 
Lord hath prospered my journey as far as it respecteth me. 

57 Send me away that I may go back to my master. Whereupon 

58 they said, Let us call our child and ask what she saith. So 
they called Bebekka and said to her, Wilt thou go with this 

59 man? And she said, I will go. Then they sent away their 
sister Bebekka and what belonged to her, and the servant of 

GO Abraham and his attendants. And they blessed Bebekka and 
said to her, Thou art our sister. Mayest thou become thou- 



!-!-! XXV. GENESIS. 

sands of myriads and may thy seed inherit the cities of their 

61 enemies. Then arose Bebekka and her maids, and mounting 
the camels they went with the man. And the servant took 
Bebekka and departed. 

62 Now Isaak had travelled through the wilderness to the well 

63 of Vision, and dwelt in the south country. And in the even- 
ing Isaak went out into the plain to meditate ; and raising his 

64 eyes he saw camels coming. Bebekka also having raised her 

65 eyes, saw Isaak and alighted from her camel. She had said to 
the servant, What man is that coming in the plain to meet us ? 
And the servant said, It is my master. Whereupon she took 

66 her veil and covered herself. And the servant told Isaak all 
that he had done. And Isaak went to his mother's house and 
took Bebekka, and she became his wife, and he loved her. 
And Isaak was comforted for the loss of his mother Sarah. 

XXV. Now Abraham had taken another wife, whose name was 

2 Chettura and she bore to him Zembran and Jesan and Madal 

3 and Madiam and Jesbok and Soie. And Jesan begat Saba 
and Dedan. And the children of Declan were Assurieim and 

4 Latusieim and Laomeim. And the children of Madiam were 

5 Gephar and Apheir and Enoch and Abeida and Eldaga. All 
these were children of Chettura. But Abraham gave to his son 

6 Isaak all his possessions, and to the children of his concubines 
Abraham gave gifts and sent them, while he was yet living, 
towards the east, into the eastern country from his son Isaak. 

7 Now these were the years of the days of Abraham's life which 

8 he lived, one hundred and seventy five years. And Abraham 
declining died in a good old age, an old man and full of days and 

9 he was added to his people. And his sons Isaak and Ismael 
buried him in the double cave in the field of Ephron the son 

10 of Saar the Chettite, which is over against Marnbre — in the field 
and the cave which Abraham bought of the children of Chet, 
there they buried Abraham with Sarah his wife. And after 

11 the death of Abraham God blessed his son Isaak; and Isaak 
dwelt at the well of Vision. 

12 Now these are the o-enerations of Abraham's son Ismael 

13 whom Agar the Egyptian, Sarah's maid, bore to Abraham ; and 
these are the names of the children of Ismael according to the 

14 names of his families. The first born of Ismael was Nabaioth, 



!-!-! XXV. GENESIS. 

15 then Kedar and Nabdael and Massani and Masrua and 
Duma and Masse and Choddan and Thaiman and Jetur and 

16 Naphes and Kednia. These are the children of Ismael and 
these are their names in their tents and in their habitations ; 

17 twelve chiefs of their respective nations. And these were the 
years of the life of Ismael, one hundred and thirty seven years, 

18 and he declining died and was added to his race. Now he in- 
habited the country from Evilat to Sour which is in front of 
Egypt, all the way to the Assyrians. In front of all his brethren 
was his habitation. 

19 And these are the generations of Isaak the son of Abraham. 

20 Abraham begot Isaak. And Isaak was forty years old when 
he took to wife Eebekka the daughter of Bathuel the Syrian 

21 of Syro Mesopotamia the sister of Laban the Syrian. And Isaak 
intreated the Lord for Eebekka his wife because she was bar- 

22 ren, and the Lord hearkened to him ; And Eebekka his wife 
conceived and the children struggled within her and she said ; 
If it is to be so with me, what doth this portend ? So she went to 

23 inquire of the Lord. And the Lord said to her, Two nations are 
in thy womb and two peoples shall be separated from thy belly, 
and the one people will excel the other and the elder shall 

24 serve the younger. So when her days to be delivered were ful- 

25 filled there were twins in her womb. And the first born came 
forth red all over hairy like a hide and she called his name 

26 Esau ; and after that came forth his brother and his hand had 

27 hold of Esau's heel, and she called his name Jacob. Now Isaak 
was sixty years old when Eebekka bore them. And when 
they grew up to be young men, Esau was a man skilled in 
hunting and fond of the field ; but Jacob was a man of plain 

28 manners and lived at home. And Isaak loved Esau, because 

29 his game was his food ; But Eebekka loved Jacob. Now when 

30 Jacob was boiling pottage Esau came from the field fainty. And 
Esau said to Jacob, Let me taste some of that red pottage, for I am 

31 fainty. For this cause his name was called Edom. And Jacob 
said to Esau, give me this day in exchange thy rights of primo- 

32 geniture. And Esau said, Lo ! I am going to die, what then are 

33 these rights of primogeniture to me ? And Jacob said to him, 
Swear now to me. So he swore to him. Thus were Esau's 

34 rights of primogeniture transferred to Jacob. Then Jacob gave 



!-!-! XXVI. GENESIS. 

Esau bread and lentil pottage. And when lie had eaten and 
drunk he arose and went away. Thus did Esau undervalue 
the rights of primogeniture. 
XXVI. Now there had been a famine in the land besides the 
former famine which happened in the time of Abraham. And 
Isaak went to Abimelech the king of the Philistines, to Gerar. 

2 For the Lord had appeared to him and said, Go not down into 

3 Egypt, but dwell in the land which I will tell thee. Sojourn 
in this land and I will be with thee and bless thee : for to thee 
and to thy seed I will give all this land. And I will establish 
my oath which I sware to thy father Abraham and multiply 

4 thy seed like the stars of heaven. And to thy seed I will give 

5 all this land ; and by thy seed all the nations of the earth shall 
be blessed ; because Abraham thy father hearkened to my 
voice and kept my ordinances and my commandments and my 

6 rules of rectitude and my rites. And while Isaak dwelt at 
Gerar the men of the place made inquiry respecting his wife 

7 Eebekka ; and he said, She is my sister, for he was afraid to say, 
She is my wife, lest perad venture the men of the place should kill 

8 him for Kebekka's sake, for she was of a very beautiful counte- 
nance. However he continued there a long time ; for Abimelech 
king of the Gerarites happening to look through a window saw 

9 Isaak dallying with Rebekka his wife. Whereupon Abimelech 
called Isaak and said to him certainly she is thy wife. Why then 
didst thou say, She is my sister? And Isaak said to him, Be- 

10 cause I thought I might perhaps die for her. And Abimelech 
said to him, Why hast thou dealt thus with us ? In a little while 
some person of my family might have lain with thy wife, and 
thou wouldst have brought guilt upon us through ignorance. 

11 Then Abimelech gave a strict charge to all his people saying, 
Whoever toucheth this man or his wife shall be liable to death. 

12 And Isaak sowed in that land and got that year an hundred 

13 fold of barley. And the Lord blessed him and the man was 
exalted and prospered more and more till he became exceed- 

14 ing great. And he had flocks and herds of cattle and many 

15 fields under cultivation. And the Philistines envied him ; and 
all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the time 
of his father, the Philistines stopped up and filled them with 

16 earth. And Abimelech said to Isaak, Depart from us, for thou 



!-!-! XXVI. GENESIS. 

17 art become far mightier than we. Upon this Isaak departed 
thence and took up his abode in the valley of Gerar and dwelt 

18 there. And Isaak digged again the wells of water, which the 
servants of his father Abraham had digged and which the Phi- 
listines had stopped up, after the death of his father Abraham. 
And he called them by the same names, by which his father 

19 had named them. Isaak's servants also digged in the valley of 

20 Gerar, and found there a well of spring water. But the shep- 
herds of the Gerarites contended with Isaak's shepherds, say- 
ing the water was theirs. So he called the name of that well In- 

21 justice : because they did him injustice. Then he removed 
thence and digged another well ; and about this also they con- 

22 tended; so he called its name Enmity. And he removed thence 
and digged another well ; and about this they did not contend ; So 
he called the name of it, Boom-enough; saying, For now the Lord 
hath made room for us, though he hath increased us in the land. 

23 And he went up thence to Well of the Oath ; and the Lord 

24 appeared to him that night and said, I am the God of thy father 
Abraham ; Fear not ; for I am with thee ; and I will bless thee 

25 and multiply thy seed for the sake of thy father Abraham. So 
he built there an altar and invoked the name of the Lord and 

2(j fixed his tent there. And while the servants of Isaak were dig- 
ging a well there in the valley of Gerar, Abimelech came to 
him from Gerar, accompanied with Ochozath his chamberlain 

27 and Phichol the general of his army. And Isaak said to them, 
Why are you come to me, seeing you have hated me and sent 

28 me away from you ? And they said, We saw plainly that the 
Lord is with thee ; therefore we said, Let there be an oath be- 

29 tween us and thee ; and we will make a covenant with thee that 
thou wilt not do us an injury, as we have not hated thee but 
used thee well and sent thee away in peace, and thou art now 

30 blessed of the Lord. Then he made an entertainment for them 

31 and they ate and drank. And early next morning they arose 
and swore one to the other. And Isaak dismissed them and 

32 they departed from him in peace. And it happened that on that 
very day the servants of Isaak came and told him of the well 
which they had been digging and said, We have found water. 

33 So he called it, Oath. For this cause they call the name of the 
city, Well of Oath, even at this day. 

VOL. i. F 



!-!-! XXVII. GENESIS. 

34 Xow when Esau was forty years old lie took to wife Judith, 
the daughter of Beoch the Chettite, and Baseroath the daughter 
of Elon the Chettite, and they were at strife with Isaak and 
Rebekka. 

XXVII. And after Isaak grew old, when his eyes were so dim- 
med that he could not see he called Esau his eldest son and said 

2 to him. My Son. And he said here I am. And he said, Behold 
I am grown old and do not know the day of my dissolution ; 

3 now therefore take thy arms — the quiver and the bow ; and go 

4 out into the field and hunt game for me and make me savory 
meat such as I love and bring it to me, that I may eat ; that 

5 my soul may bless thee before I die. Xow Kebekka heard 
Isaak speaking to his son Esau. So when Esau was gone to 

6 the field to hunt game for his father, Rebekka said to Jacob 
her younger son. Lo ! I heard thy father speaking to thy bro- 

7 ther Esau saying, Bring me game and make me savory meat 
that I may eat and bless thee in the presence of the Lord be- 

8 fore I die. Now therefore, my son, hearken to me as I com- 

9 mand thee, and go to the flock and fetch me thence two kids 
tender and good, and I will make them savory meat for thy fa- 

10 ther such as he loveth and thou shalt carry it to thy father that 

11 he may eat ; that thy father may bless thee before he die. And 
Jacob said to his mother Rebekka, My brother Esau is a 

12 hairy man and I am a smooth man. Perhaps my father may feel 
me, and I shall be before him as a deceiver, so I shall bring 

13 upon myself a curse and not a blessing. And his mother said 
to him, Upon me, my son, be thy curse. Only hearken to my 

14 voice ; and go and bring me them. So he went and took and 
brought them to his mother ; and his mother made savory meat 

15 such as his father loved. And Rebekka took the robe of Esau 
her eldest son, the robe of dignity which was with her in the 

16 house and put it on her younger son Jacob. And she put the 

17 skins of the kids on his arms and the naked parts of his neck ; 

18 and gave the savory meat and cakes which she had baked, into 
the hands of her son Jacob ; and he took them to his father and 

19 said, Father ! And he said, Here I am. Who art thou, my son ? 
And Jacob said to his father. I am Esau, thy first born. I have 

20 done as thou badest me. Arise, sit up, and eat of my game that 
thy soul may bless me. And Isaak said to his son, What is this, 



!-!-! XXVII. GENESIS. 

21 my son, which thou hast found so quickly ? And he said, It is what 
the Lord thy God presented to my view. And Isaak said to Ja- 
cob, Come near my son and let me feel thee, whether thou be 

22 my son Esau or not. And Jacob went near to his father Isaak. 
And when he had felt him he said, The voice indeed is the voice 

23 of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau. So he did not 
discover him, because his hands were hairy like the hands of his 

2-i brother Esau, when he blessed him. Then he said. Art thou 

25 my son Esau ? And he said, I am. And he said, Bring it near to 
me and I will eat of thy game, my son, that my soul may bless 
thee. So he brought it near to him and he ate. And he brought 

26 wine and he drank. And Isaak his father said to him, Come 

27 near me my son and kiss me. And when he came near and 
kissed him ; he smelled the smell of his raiment and blessed 
him and said, Behold the fragrance of my son is like the fra- 

28 grance of a full field which the Lord hath blessed. Therefore 
God give thee from the dew of heaven and from the fatness of 
the land plenty of corn and wine. May nations serve thee ; and 

29 princes bow down to thee. Be thou lord of thy brother. And 
let the children of thy father pay thee homage. Cursed be 
he who curseth thee ; and let him who blesseth thee be bles- 
sed. 

30 Now after Isaak had finished blessing his son Jacob, when 
Jacob had but just withdrawn from the presence of his father 

31 Isaak, Esau his brother came from the chace. He also had 
made savory meat and he brought it to his father and said to 
him, Arise my father and eat thy son's venison, that thy soul 

32 may bless me. And Isaak his father said to him, Who art 

33 thou ? And he said I am thy son, thy first born Esau. Then 
was Isaak absorpt in great amazement and said, Who then is 
he who hath hunted game and brought it to me, and I have 
eaten of all before thou earnest and have blessed him, and he 

34 will be blessed. And when Esau heard the words of his father 
Isaak he cried with a loud and very bitter cry and said, Bless, 

35 I beseech thee, me also, Father. And he said to him, Thy 
brother hath come deceitfully and taken thy blessing. And 

36 Esau said, His name is rightly called Jacob ; for lo ! he hath now 
supplanted me a second time. He took from me my rights of 

37 primogeniture; and now he hath taken my blessing. Then 



!-!-! XXVIII. GENESIS. 

Esau said to his father, Hast thou not, father, reserved a 
blessing for me? And Isaak in reply said to Esau, Seeing I 
have made him thy lord and made all his brethren his servants 
and have also supported him with corn and wine, what can I 

38 do for thee, my son ? And Esau said to his father, Hast thou 
but one blessing, father? Bless, I beseech thee, me also, 
father. And Isaak being deeply affected, Esau raised his voice 

39 and wept. And Isaak his father answered and said to him, Be- 
hold thy dwelling shall border on the fatness of the earth and 
on the dew of heaven from above. By thy sword thou shalt 

40 live and thou shalt serve thy brother. But the time will come 
when thou mayst shake off and loose his yoke from thy neck. 

41 So Esau harboured a rooted hatred against Jacob on ac- 
count of the blessing with which his father had blessed him. 
And in this agitation of his mind Esau said, ! that the days of 
mourning for my father were come that I may kill my brother 

42 Jacob. And when the words of Esau her eldest son were told 
to Rebekka she sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him, 

43 Behold thy brother Esau threateneth to kill thee. Now there- 
fore, my son, hearken to my voice and arise and flee to Meso- 

44 potamia to my brother Laban at Charran, and dwell with him 
for some time till the fury and the anger of thy brother turn 

45 away from thee, and until he forget what thou hast done to 
him, then I will send for thee from that place. Perhaps I may 

46 be bereaved of you both in one day. Then Bebekka said to 
Isaak, I am weary of my life on account of the daughters of 
the children of Chet. If Jacob should take a wife of the daugh- 

XXVIII. ters of this land what would life be to me ? Upon this 
Isaak called Jacob to him and blessed him and charged him 
saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of the Cha- 

2 nanites. Arise and go to Mesopotamia and to the house of 
Bathuel thy mother's father, and take thence a wife for thyself 

3 of the daughters of Laban thy mother's brother. And may my 
God bless thee and make thee fruitful and multiply thee, that 

4 thou mayst become a multitude of nations. And may he give 
thee the blessing of my father Abraham, to thee and thy seed 
after thee, to inherit this land of thy sojourning, which God 

5 gave to Abraham. So Isaak sent away Jacob and he went to 
Mesopotamia to Laban the son of Bathuel the Syrian the bro- 
ther of Bebekka who was the mother of Jacob and Esau. 






!-!-! XXVIII. GENESIS. 

6 When Esau saw that Isaak had blessed Jacob and sent him 
to Syro Mesopotamia to take there a wife for himself, and that 
when he blessed him he charged him saying, Thou shalt not 

7 take a wife of the daughters of the Chananites ; and that Jacob 
hearkened to his father and mother and was gone to Syrian 

8 Mesopotamia, Esau seeing that the daughters of the Chananites 

9 were displeasing in the sight of his father Isaak, went to Is- 
mael and in addition to his other wives took to wife Maeleth 
the daughter of Ismael, Abraham's son, the sister of Xabaioth. 

10 Xow when Jacob set out from Well of the Oath, and was 

11 proceeding on his journey to Charran he came to a place and 
went to rest there, for the sun was setting. Having taken one 
of the stones of the place and put it at his head he composed 

12 himself to rest in that place and dreamed ; and lo ! a ladder set 
on the earth, the top of which reached up to heaven and the an- 

13 gels of God were ascending and descending on it. And the 
Lord leaned over it and said, I am the God of Abraham thy 
father and the God of Isaak. Fear not. To thee and to thy 

14 seed I will give the land in which thou art sleeping. And thy 
seed shall be as the dust of the earth and shall spread abroad 
to the west and the south, and the north and the east. And by 
thee all the tribes of the earth shall be blessed, namely by the 

15 seed of thee. And lo ! I am with thee watching; over thee in all 
the way thou goest and I will bring thee back to this land : for 
I will not leave thee until I have done all that I have spoken 

16 to thee. And when Jacob awoke from his sleep he said, Surely 

17 the Lord is in this place and I knew it not. And he was ter- 
rified and said, How awful is this place; This is no other than 

18 the house of God. And this is the gate of heaven. So when 
Jacob arose in the morning he took the stone which he had 

19 there put at his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on 
the top of it ; and called the name of that place House of God. 

20 But the first name of this city was Oulamluz. And Jacob 
made a vow saying, If the Lord God will be with me and watch 
over me in the way in which I am going and give me bread to 

21 eat and raiment to clothe me and bring me back safely to my 

22 father's house, The Lord shall be my God. And this stone 
which I have set up as a pillar shall be for a house of God. 
And of all that thou mayst give me I will set apart a tenth 
for thee. 



!-!-! XXIX. GENESIS. 

XXIX. Then Jacob proceeded on, and went to the land of the 
east to Laban the son of Bathuel, the Syrian, the brother of 

2 Eebekka who was Jacob and Esau's mother. And looking, 
he saw a well in the plain and there were three flocks of sheep 

3 lying by it ; for out of that well they watered the flocks. Xow 
there was a great stone on the mouth of the well, and when all 
the flocks were collected there, the shepherds rolled away the 
stone from the mouth of the well, and watered the sheep ; and 
then put the stone again in its place on the mouth of the well. 

4 And Jacob said to them, Brethren, whence are you ? And 

5 they said, We are of Charran. xlnd he said to them, Do you 

6 know Laban the son of Nachor ? And they said, We know 
him. And he said to them, Is he well ? And they said, He is 
well. And lo yonder is Kachel his daughter ! She was coming 

7 with the sheep. Then Jacob said to them, There is yet much 
day. It is not yet time for the cattle to be folded. Water the 

S flocks and lead them off to feed. But they said, We cannot, till 
all the shepherds are come together. Then they will roll the 
stone from the mouth of the well ; and we will water the flocks. 
9 While he was yet speaking with them, lo ! Kachel the daugh- 
ter of Laban came with her father's sheep ; for she tended her 
10 father's flock. And when Jacob saw Kachel the daughter of 
Laban his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his mo- 
ther's brother, Jacob went and rolled the stone from the mouth 
of the well, and watered the flock of Laban his mother's bro- 
il ther. And Jacob kissed Kachel, and raising his voice he wept 

12 and told Kachel that he was her father's brother ; and that he 
was the son of Kebekka. Whereupon she ran and told her 

13 father the news. And when Laban heard the name of Jacob 
his sister's son, he ran to meet him, and having embraced him 
he kissed him, and brought him to his house. And Jacob re- 

1-1 lated to him all these circumstances. And Laban said to him, 
Thou art of my bones and of my flesh. And when Jacob had 

15 been with him a month, Laban said to Jacob, Because thou 
art indeed my brother, thou shalt not serve me for nothing. 

16 Tell me what must be thy wages. Xow Laban had two daugh- 
ters. The name of the eldest was Leia ; and the name of the 

17 youngest, Kachel. Leia's eyes were weak, but Kachel was of 

18 a beautiful countenance, and a very comely person. And Ja- 






!-!-! XXX. GENESIS. 

cob loved Rachel, therefore he said, I will serve thee seven 

19 years for Rachel thy youngest daughter. And Laban said to 
him, It is better for me to give her to thee than to give her to 

20 another man. Abide with me. So Jacob served seven years 
for Eachel, and they appeared to him as a few days, because 

21 he loved her. Then Jacob said to Laban, Give me my wife, 

22 for the days are completed, that I may go in unto her. Where- 
upon Laban collected all the men of the place, and made a 

23 wedding feast. And in the evening he took his daughter Leia 

24 and brought her to Jacob ; and Jacob went in unto her. And 
Laban gave his maid Zelpha to his daughter Leia, to be her 

25 handmaid. And in the morning, when Jacob saw it was Leia, 
he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done to me ? Did I 
not serve thee for Rachel ? Why then hast thou deceived me ? 

26 And Laban answered, It is not customary with us in this place 

27 to give the younger before the elder. Finish therefore this one's 
week, and I will give thee the other for the service which thou 

28 mayst perform for me yet other seven years. And Jacob did 
so. And when he had finished this one's week, Laban gave 

29 him to wife his daughter Rachel ; and Laban gave to his daugh- 

30 ter Rachel, his maid Balla to be her handmaid. And Jacob 
went in unto Rachel, and loved Rachel more than Leia, and 

31 served him other seven years. Now when the Lord God saw 
that Leia was slighted, he opened her womb, but Rachel was 

32 barren. And Leia conceived and bore Jacob a son and called 
his name Reuben; saying, Because the Lord hath seen my 
affliction ; therefore he hath given me a son. Now therefore my 

33 husband will love me. And she conceived again, and bore to 
Jacob another son, and said, Because the Lord hath heard that 
I am slighted, he hath given me this son also ; so she called his 

34 name Symeon. And she conceived again and bore a son, and 
said, Now will my husband abide with me for I have born him 

35 three sons; therefore she called his name Levi. And she con- 
ceived again and bore a son and said, Now for this also I will 
praise the Lord, therefore she called his name Judas. Then 
she ceased from bearing. 

XXX. Now when Rachel saw that she bore no children to Ja- 
cob, she envied her sister and said to Jacob, Give me children, 
2 else I shall die. And Jacob was angry with Rachel and said to 



!-!-! XXX. GENESIS. 

her, Am I in God's stead, who hath deprived thee of the fruit 

3 of the womb ? Then Kachel said to Jacobs There is my maid 
Balla ; go in unto her, and she shall bring forth on my knees, 

4 so I also shall be supplied with children by her means. So she 
<mve him her maid Balla for a wife : and Jacob went in unto 

5 her, And Balla Eachel's maid conceived and bore Jacob a son. 

6 And Bachel said, God hath judged for me and hath heard my 
voice and given me a son : for this cause she called his name 

7 Dan. And Balla, Eachel's maid conceived again and bore to 

8 Jacob another son. Whereupon Kachel said, God helped me 
when I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed. So she 
called his name Nephthaleim. 

9 Now when Leia saw that she had ceased from bearing, 
she also took her maid Zelpha and gave her to Jacob for a wife, 

10 and he went in unto her. And Zelpha, Leia's maid conceived 

11 and bore Jacob a son. Whereupon Leia said, Good luck. So 

12 she called his name Gad. And Zelpha, Leia's maid conceiv- 
ed again and bore Jacob another son. Upon which Leia said, 

13 Happy am I ; for the women will call me happy. So she called 
his name Aser. 

14 And at the time of the wheat harvest, Keuben went out and 
found in the field mandragore apples and brought them to his 

15 mother Leia. And Kachel said to her sister Leia, Give me 
some of thy son's mandragores. And Leia said, Is it not 
enough for thee that thou hast taken my husband ? Wouldst 
thou take also my son's mandragores ? And Kachel said, Shall 
I not have them on this condition ? Let him be with thee to 

16 night for thy son's mandragores. So when Jacob was coming 
from the field in the evening, Leia went out to meet him and 
said, Thou must come in to me today ; for I have hired thee 

17 for my son's mandragores. And he lay with her that night, 
and God hearkened to Leia and she having conceived bore to 

18 Jacob a fifth son. xind Leia said, God hath given me my re- 

19 ward for having given my maid to my husband. So she called 
his name Issachar, that is Reward. And Leia conceived again 

20 and bore a sixth son to Jacob. Whereupon Leia said, God 
hath now endowed me with a good dowry. My husband will 

21 make choice of me, for I have born him six sons. So she cal- 
led his name Zabulon. And after this she bore a daughter and 
called her name Deina. 



!-!-! XXX. GENESIS. 

22 Now God had remembered Kachel and God hearkened to 

23 her and opened her womb. And she having conceived bore 
Jacob a son. Whereupon she said, God hath taken away my 

24 reproach. So she called his name Joseph, saying, May God 
add to me another son. 

25 And when Kachel had born Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, 
Send me away, that I may go to my place and to my own 

26 country. Give me up my wives and my children for whom I 
have served thee, that I may go away : for thou knowest the 

27 service which I have done thee. Upon which Laban said to 
him, If I have found favour in thy sight, I would avert this evil : 

28 for God hath blessed me by thy coming. State to me thy wa- 

29 ges and I will give it. And Jacob said, Thou knowest what 
service I have done thee, and how many cattle belonging to 

30 thee are now with me. Thy stock was small before I came ; 
but it is increased to a multitude, and the Lord hath blessed 
thee by my attendance. Now then, when shall I provide a 

31 house for myself. And Laban said, What shall I give thee ? 
To which Jacob replied, Thou shalt not give me any thing. 
If thou wilt do this for me, I will again feed thy flock and 

32 keep watch. Let all thy flocks this day pass in review and se- 
parate thou from them every grizly sheep among the lambs, 

33 and every one speckled and spotted among the goats. Such 
shall be my hire and my righteousness shall answer for me in 
time to come ; for my wages are apparent to thee. AVhatever 
is not speckled and spotted among the goats, and grizly 
among the sheep, if found with me, let it be deemed stolen. 

34 xVnd Laban said to him, Let it be according to thy proposal. 

35 And that very day he separated the goats which were speck- 
led and spotted, both male and female, and every one among 
the lambs which was grizly and every one in which there was 
a mixture of white, and delivered them into the hands of his 

36 sons, and set three days journey between them and Jacob. 

37 And Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks. And Jacob took 
him rods of the styrax and almond and plane-tree and peeled 
off the white bark, and twisting it round the green, the white 

38 which he peeled off appeared speckled. And he placed the 
rods which he had peeled, in the watering troughs, in order 
that, when the flocks came to drink, they might engender at 

VOL. I. G 



!-!-! XXXI. GENESIS. 

39 the rods, while they were drinking, with the rods in view. So 
the flocks engendered at the rods and brought forth cattle 

40 streaked and spotted and ash coloured. And when Jacob had 
separated the lambs and placed before the ewes a spotted 
ram and all that had spots among the lambs, then he kept the 
flocks which were for himself apart by themselves and did 

41 not mix them with the flocks of Laban. And at the season 
when the sheep were engendering and conceiving, Jacob put 
the rods in the troughs before some, that they might engender 
before the rods ; but before others that had lambed he did not 

42 place them. Thus the indifferent became Laban's but the 

43 choicest were Jacob's. And the man became very rich and 
had much cattle and herds and men servants and maid ser- 

XXXI. vants and camels and asses. And Jacob heard the 
words of Laban's sons saying, Jacob hath taken all that be- 
longed to our father, and with our father's substance he hath 

2 acquired all this glory. And Jacob beheld the countenance of 
Laban, and lo ! it was not towards him as heretofore. 

3 Then the Lord said to Jacob, Keturn to thy father's land 

4 and to thy kindred and I will be with thee. Thereupon Jacob 
sent for Leia and Eachel to the field where the flocks were 

5 and said to them, I see that the countenance of your father is 

6 not towards me as heretofore. Though the God of my father 

7 was with me; and you also know that with all my ability I 
have served your father ; yet your father hath dealt deceitful- 
ly with me, and at the ten lambings hath changed my wages. 

8 But God suffered him not to hurt me. When he said the 
speckled shall be thy wages, then all the cattle brought forth 
speckled. And when he said, The white shall be thy wages. 

9 Then all the cattle brought forth white. So the Lord hath 

10 taken all the cattle of your father and given them to me. In- 
deed when the flocks engendered I beheld with my eyes in a 
dream, and lo ! the he-goats and the rams, which leaped upon 
the sheep and the goats were ring-streaked, spotted and ash 

11 coloured. Moreover an angel of God said to me in a dream, 

12 Jacob ! And I said, What is the matter. And he said, Lift up 
thy eyes and behold the he-goats and the rams which are leap- 
ing on the sheep and the goats ! They are ring-streaked, 
speckled and ash coloured ; for I have seen what Laban is do- 



!-!-! XX XL GENESIS. 

13 ing to thee. I am the God who appeared to thee at the place 
of God, where thou didst anoint for me a pillar and where 
thou didst make a vow. Now therefore arise and depart from 
this land and go to the land of thy nativity, and I will be with 

14 thee. In reply to which Kachel and Leia said to him, Have we 

15 any more a portion or an inheritance in our father's house ? Are 
we not accounted by him as strangers ? For he hath sold us 

16 and spent the money he got for us. Now since all the riches 
and glory which God hath taken from our father shall be ours 
and our children's, do then what God hath commanded thee. 

17 So Jacob arose and put his wives and his children on camels, 

18 and carried off all his substance, and all the goods which he had 
gotten in Mesopotamia, and all that belonged to him, to go to 
his father Isaak in the land of Chanaan. 

19 Xow Laban being gone to sheer his sheep, Rachel stole 

20 her father's idols. And Jacob concealed his design from Laban 

21 the Syrian by not telling him that he was going away. And 
he departed with all that belonged to him and crossed the river 

22 and bent his course to mount Galaad. But on the third day 
news was brought to Laban the Syrian, that Jacob was fled. 

23 Whereupon taking with him his brethren he pursued him se- 

24 ven days journey and overtook him at mount Galaad. But God 
came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night and said to him, 

25 Take care that thou speak not evil to Jacob. Now when Laban 
overtook Jacob, Jacob had pitched his tent on the mount. So 

26 Laban halted his brethren at mount Galaad. And Laban said 
to Jacob, What hast thou done ? Why didst thou flee away 
secretly, and steal off without my knowledge, and carry away 

27 my daughters as if captivated by the sword ? Hadst thou told 
me I might have sent thee away with joy and musick, with 

28 timbrels and the kithara. But I have not been thought worthy 

29 to kiss my children and my daughters. Now therefore thou 
hast acted foolishly ; and it is now in my power to punish thee. 
But the God of thy father spoke to me last night saying, Take 

30 care that thou speak not evil to Jacob. Now grant that thou 
hast gone because thou hadst a longing desire to return to thy 
father's house, yet why hast thou stolen my Gods ? 

31 In reply to this Jacob said to Laban, I was afraid ; for I 
thought that thou perhaps wouldst take from me thy daughters 



!-!-! XXXI. GENESIS. 

32 and all that are mine : but said Jacob, with whomsoever thou 
flndest thy Gods, let him not live. In the presence of our bre- 
thren, examine what there is of thine with me and take it. He 

33 knew of nothing with him. Now Jacob did not know that his 
wife Eachel had stolen them. So when Laban had gone in and 
searched Leia's tent and found them not ; and from Leia's 
tent had gone and searched the tent of Jacob and in the tent 

34 of the two handmaids but did not find them. Then he went in 
also to Rachel's tent. Now Rachel had taken the idols and put 

35 them in the camel's furniture and sat upon them, and she said 
to her father, Be not offended my lord, I cannot rise before 
thee, for the custom of women is upon me. So when Laban 

36 had searched the whole tent but did not find the idols, Jacob 
was inflamed with resentment and remonstrated against Laban. 
And Jacob addressing Laban said, What is my crime, and 
what my offence that thou hast pursued me ? And that thou 

37 hast searched all the goods of my house? What hast thou 
found of all the goods of thy house ? Set it here before thy 
brethren and my brethren and let them judge between us both 

38 These twenty years that I have been with thee, thy sheep and 
thy goats have not cast their young ; nor have I devoured the 

39 rams of thy flock. What was torn by wild beasts I brought not 
to thee. I made up at my own expence the loss of what was 

40 stolen by day or by night. I have borne the sultry heat of the 
day and the frost of the night, and sleep departed from my 

41 eyes. I have been in thy family these twenty years. I served 
thee fourteen years for thy two daughters ; and six years for thy 
flocks; though thou didst change my wages at the ten lamb- 

42 ings. Had not the God of my father Abraham and the fear of 
Isaak been with me, thou wouldst now have sent me away 
empty. God hath seen my affliction and the labour of my 

43 hands, therefore he rebuked thee last night. In reply to this 
Laban said to Jacob, These daughters are my daughters, and 
the children are my children, and the cattle are my cattle. 
Even all that thou seest are mine and my daughters. What 

44 now can I do to them and their children whom they have born ? 
Now therefore come and let us make a covenant, both I and 
thou. And let it be for a memorial between me and thee. And 
he said to him, Behold there is none with us ; God a witness 



!-!-! XXXII. GENESIS. 

45 between me and thee hath seen. Then Jacob took a stone and 

46 set it up for a pillar. And Jacob said to his brethren, Collect 
stones. And when they had collected stones and made a heap, 

47 they eat thereon. Then Laban said to him, This heap is this 
day a witness between me and thee ; so Laban called it, The 

48 heap of witness ; but Jacob called it Heap ivitness. And 
Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap and this pillar which I 
have set between me and thee ! This heap witnesseth and this 
pillar witnesseth (for this cause its name was called Heap wit- 

49 nesseth and the sight, which said he, God would see between 
me and thee, because we shall be separated one from the 

50 other) if thou afflict my daughters, if thou take other wives 
besides my daughters, look ! though there be none with us to 

51 see, God is a witness between me and thee. Moreover Laban 

52 said to Jacob, Behold; this heap is a witness and this pillar 
also, that if I pass not to thee neither shalt thou pass to me be- 

53 yond this heap and this pillar for harm. The God of Abraham 

54 and the God of Xachor judge between us. And Jacob swore 
by the Fear of his father Isaak. Then he offered a sacrifice upon 
the mount and invited his brethren and they ate and drank 

^ and slept on the mount. And in the morning Laban arose and 

XXXII. kissed his daughters and blessed them. And Laban 

departed and went to his place and Jacob proceeded on his 

journey. And raising his eyes he saw a camp of God pitched 

2 and messengers of God were coming: to meet him. And when 
Jacob saw them he said, That is a camp of God, So he called 
the name of that place Camps. 

3 Xow Jacob had sent messengers before him to his brother 
Esau, to the land of Seir, to the country of Edom, and had 

4 given them a charge, saying, Thus shall you say to my lord 

5 Esau, Thus saith thy servant Jacob, I have sojourned with La- 
ban and staid till now. And I have got oxen and asses and 
sheep and men servants and maid servants. And I have sent 
to give notice to my lord Esau, that thy servant may find fa- 

6 vour in thy sight. So the messengers returned to Jacob and 
said, We have been to thy brother Esau ; and lo ! he is coming 

7 to meet thee; and four hundred men with him. Thereupon 
Jacob was greatly terrified and distressed. And he divided the 
people who were with him ami the cattle and the camels and 



!-!-! XXXII. GENESIS. 

8 the flocks into two camps. And Jacob said, If Esau come to 
the first camp and smite it, there will be another camp to 

9 escape. Then Jacob said, God of my father Abraham, and 
the God of my father lsaak, Thou, Lord, who saidst to me, 
Keturn to the land of thy nativity, and I will deal well with 

10 thee ; let me be satisfied with all the kindness and with all the 
truth which thou hast shewn to thy servant. For with this staff 
of mine I crossed the Jordan, but now I am become two 

11 camps. Deliver me from the hand of my brother — from the 
hand of Esau ; for I am afraid of him. Perad venture he may 

12 come and smite me and the mother with the children. But 
thou hast said, 1 will deal well with thee and make thy seed 
like the sand of the sea, which, for multitude cannot be num- 

13 bered. So he halted there that night and took presents of what 

14 he had brought and sent to his brother Esau two hun- 

15 dred she-goats and twenty he-goats ; two hundred ewes and 
twenty rams ; thirty milch camels with their thirty colts ; forty 

16 cows and ten bulls ; twenty asses and ten foles. These he de- 
livered to his servants, each drove by itself, and he said to his 
servants, Go on before me and make a small distance between 

17 drove and drove. And he gave orders to the first saying, If 
my brother Esau meet thee and ask thee saying, To whom 
dost thou belong, and whither art thou going ? And whose are 

18 these before thee ? thou shalt say, They belong to thy ser- 
vant Jacob — presents which he hath sent to my lord Esau. 

19 And lo ! he is behind us. This charge he gave to the first, and 
to the second, and to the third, and to all who went before him 
after their droves, saying, In this manner speak to Esau when 

20 you meet him. Moreover ye shall say, Behold thy servant Ja- 
cob is coming behind us. For he said, I will appease him with 
these previous gifts, and afterwards I will look him in the face, 
perhaps he will receive me favourably. 

21 So the presents went on before him ; but he lay that night 

22 in the camp. And he arose in the night and took his two wives 
with the two handmaids and his eleven sons and crossed the 

23 ford of Jabok. And when he had taken and conducted them 
over the brook he caused all belonging to him to cross over ; 

24 and Jacob was left alone. And a man wrestled with him till 

25 the murning. And when he saw that he could not prevail 



!-!-! XXXTTT. GENESIS. 

against him lie touched the hollow of his thigh ; and the hol- 
low of Jacob's thigh became numb, in wrestling with him. 

26 And he said to him, Let me go : for the dawn approached. 

27 But Jacob said I will not let thee go unless thou bless me. And 
he said to him what is thy name ? to which he replied, Jacob. 

28 Thereupon he said to him, Thy name shall no more be Jacob 
only, but Israel also shall be thy name. Since thou hast been 
enabled to prevail with God, therefore with men thou shalt be 

29 mighty. Then Jacob asked him saying, Tell me thy name. 

30 And he said why dost thou ask my name ? Then he blessed 
him there. And Jacob called the name of that place, Face of 
God : for I have seen God face to face and my life is preserv- 

31 ed. Now the sun was risen when he departed from Face of 

32 Goal : and he limped with his thigh. For this cause even to this 
day the children of Israel do not eat the sinew which is in the 
hollow of the thigh which was numbed ; for he had touch- 
ed the hollow of Jacob's thigh on the sinew and it was numb- 
ed. 

XXXIII. Now when Jacob looked up and saw with his eyes, 
that lo ! Esau his brother was coming and with him four hun- 

2 dred men ; thereupon Jacob divided his children to Leia, and 
Kachel, and the two maids. And he put the two maids and 
their children foremost, and Leia and her children next, and 

3 Eachel and Joseph hindmost. And he himself went before 
them ; and he made a low obeisance to the ground seven times 

4 until he came near to his brother. And Esau ran to meet him 
and embraced him and fell upon his neck and kissed him and 

5 they both wept. And when Esau looked up and saw the wo- 
men and the children he said, What ! Are these thine ! To 
which Jacob replied, These are the children with which God 

6 hath favoured thy servant. Then the maids and their children 

7 came near and made obeisance ; next Leia and her children 
came near and made obeisance ; and after that Rachel came 
near with Joseph ; and when they had made obeisance he said, 

8 What is the meaning of all those droves which I met ? And 
Jacob said, That thy servant may find favour in the sight of 

9 thee my lord. Whereupon Esau said, I have enough, my 
10 brother ; keep thou thine own. But Jacob replied, If I have 

found favour in thy sight, receive these presents at my hands, 



!-!-! XXXIV. GENESIS. 

because I have seen thy face as one would see the face of God ; 

11 and thou wilt oblige me. Receive these my blessings which 
I have brought thee ; because God hath dealt bountifully with 

12 me, and is all things to me. So he pressed him and he took 
them. Then he said, Let us depart and march on straightway. 

13 But Jacob said to him, My lord perceive th that the children 
are tender, and the sheep and cows with me have just had 
young. If therefore I over drive them one day, all the cattle 

14. will die. Let my lord go on before his servant, and I will 
recruit them on the way by a leisurely march as fast as the 

15 young can walk, until I come to my lord at Seir. Then Esau 
said, Let me leave with thee some of the people who are with 
me. To which Jacob replied, What need is there ? It is suffi- 
cient that I have found favour in the sight of thee, my lord. 

16 So Esau set out that day on his return to Seir and Jacob march- 

17 ed on to Booths, and there built houses for himself and booths 
for his cattle, for which cause he called the name of that place 
Booths. 

18 And when Jacob came from Syrian Mesopotamia he went 
to Salem a city of the Sekimites which is in the land of Chanaan, 

19 and encamped before the city, and purchased of Emmor, the 

20 father of Sychem, the part of the field where he had pitched 
his tent for a hundred lambs and he erected there an Altar and 

XXXIV. invoked the God of Israel. And Deina the daughter 
of Leia, whom she bore to Jacob, went out to make an ac- 

2 quaintance with the daughters of the neighbours. And Sychem 
the son of Emmor the Evite, who was the prince of the coun- 
try, saw her and took her and lay with her and humbled her. 

3 And having applied himself to gain the affections of Deina the 
daughter of Jacob, for he loved the virgin, and having spoken 

4 to her according to the wishes of the virgin, Sychem said to 

5 his father Emmor, Get me this young woman for a wife. Now 
Jacob had heard that the son of Emmor had defiled his daugh- 
ter Deina ; but as his sons were with the cattle in the field 

6 Jacob held his peace till they came. So Emmor the father of 

7 Sychem went out to Jacob to speak to him ; and Jacob's sons 
came from the plain. And when the men heard, they were stung 
to the quick ; and it was exceedingly painful to them, that he 
had brought dishonour on Israel by lying with Jacob's daughter, 



!-!-! XXXIY. GENESIS. 

8 and it should not pass so. And E minor spoke to them saying, 
My son Sychem hath a passionate fondness for your daughter, 
therefore give her to him for a wife, and unite yourselves to 

9 us by the ties of affinity. Give us your daughters and take 

10 our daughters for your sons and dwell among us. Behold the 
land before you is spacious. Dwell and trade therein and pur- 

11 chase possessions in it. Sychem also said to her father and to 
her brothers, Let me find favour in your sight ; and what- 

12 ever you say we will give. Make the dower ever so great I 
will Igive whatever you tell me, so you give me this damsel 

13 for a wife. But the sons of Jacob answered Sychem and Em- 

14 mor his father deceitfully. And because their sister had been 
defiled, Symeon and Levi the brothers of Deina spoke to them 
and said, We cannot do this thing to give our sister to a man 

15 who is uncircumcised ; for that with us is a reproach. On this 
condition only will we coalesce with you and dwell with you — 

16 if you become like us by every male of you being circumcised, 
then we will give you our daughters and take your daughters 

17 for wives, and dwell among you and be as one race. But if 
you will not hearken to us to be circumcised, we will take 

18 our daughter and depart. And the proposal pleased Eminor 

19 and Sychem the son of Eminor. And the young man made 
no delay to carry this into execution, for he was passionately 
fond of Jacob's daughter. 

20 Now he was the most honourable of all his father's family : 
so Emmor and his son Sychem went to the gate of their city 

21 and spoke to the men of their city saying. These are peaceable 
men; let them dwell with us in the land and use it for the 
purposes of trade. Behold the land before them is spacious. 
Let us take their daughters for our wives and give them our 

22 daughters. Only on this condition will these men dwell with 
us so as to be one people — that every male among us be cir- 

23 cumcised as they are circumcised. Will not their cattle and four 

24 footed beasts and all their substance become ours ? Let us only 
be like them in this, and they will dwell with us. Accordingly 
all who went in at the gate of their city hearkened to Emmor 
and his son Sychem and were every male of them, circum- 

25 cised. And on the third day when they were in pain, the two 
sons of Jacob, Symeon and Levi the brothers of Deina took, 

VOL. I. H 



!-!-! XXXV. GENESIS. 

each his sword and entered the city without danger and slew 

26 every male. They slew both Emmor and Sychem his son 
with the edge of the sword, and took Deina out of Sychem's 

27 house and went away. And the sons of Jacob came upon the 
slain and rifled the city in which their sister Deina had been 
defiled ; and took their flocks and their herds and their asses, 
both all that was in the city and all that was in the field, and 
took captive all their servants and all their children and their 
wives and plundered what was in the city and what was in the 

30 houses. Thereupon Jacob said to Symeon and Levi, You 
have made me an object of hatred so as to be deemed a mor- 
tal enemy to all the inhabitants of the land, both to the Chana- 
nites and the Pherezites. Now as I am few in number they 
will assemble against me and fall upon me, and I and my 

31 house shall be utterly destroyed. And they said, But shall 
they treat our sister like a harlot ? 

XXXV. Then God said to Jacob, arise and go to the place 
Bethel and dwell there. And erect there an altar to the God 
who appeared to thee, when thou wast fleeing from the face 

2 of thy brother Esau. Thereupon Jacob said to his family and 
to all who were with him, Put away the strange gods which 
are with you and purify yourselves and change your gar- 

3 ments ; and let us arise and go to Bethel and build there an 
altar to the God who hearkened to me in a day of distress — 
who was with me and preserved me in the way in which I 

4 went. So they gave Jacob the strange gods, which were in 
their hands and the ear rings which were in their ears ; and 
Jacob hid them in the pine grove, which was in the country 

5 of the Sekimites and destroyed them even to this day. Then 
Israel removed from the country of the Sekimites; and a 
terror of God was on all the cities around them, so that they 

6 did not pursue the children of Israel. And when Jacob came 
to Louza which is in the land of Chanaan, the same is Baithel, 

7 he and all the people who were with him, he built there an al- 
tar, and called the name of the place Baithel ; because God 
appeared to him there, when he was fleeing from the face of 

8 his brother Esau. And Debbora the nurse of Eebekka died 
and was buried under the Oak below Baithel. So Jacob called 

9 its name Oak of mourning. And God appeared to Jacob again 



!-!-! XXXV. GENESIS. 

at Louza after he came from Syrian Mesopotamia, and God 

10 blessed him and God said to him, Thy name shall no more 
be called Jacob ; but Israel shall be thy name. So he called 

11 his name Israel. And God said to him, I am thy God. In- 
crease and multiply. Of thee shall be nations and collections 

12 of nations; and kings shall spring from thy loins. And this 
land, which I gave to Abraham and Isaak, I have given to 
thee. To thee it shall belong : and to thy seed after thee I 

13 will give this land. And when God ascended from him — from 

14 the place where he had spoken with him, Jacob set up a pil- 
lar — a stone pillar in the place where God spoke to him ; and 

15 he made a libation thereon and poured oil upon it. And Ja- 
cob called the name of the place where God spoke with him, 
Baithel. 

16 And Jacob removed from Baithel and pitched his tent 
• beyond the tower of Gader. And when he was near Chabratha 

on the way to Ephratha, Rachel was taken in labour and had 

17 a hard delivery. And when she was in the sharp pangs of 
child birth, the midwife said to her, Courage ; for this also is 

18 a son for thee. And just as she was departing (for she died) 
she called his name Sun of my sorrow ; but his father called 

19 his name Benjamin. And Rachel died and was buried in the 

20 race ground of Ephratha, which is Bethlehem. And Jacob 
erected a pillar over her grave. The same is the pillar of 

21 Rachel's grave even to this day. And while Israel dwelt in 
that land, Reuben went and lay with Balla the concubine of 
his father Jacob, and Israel heard of it, and it appeared evil in 
his sight. 

22 Now the sons of Jacob were twelve. The sons of Leia, 
Reuben, Jacob's first born, Symeon, Levi, Judas, Issachar, 
Zabulon : and the sons of Rachel, Joseph and Benjamin ; and 
the sons of Balla, Rachel's handmaid, Dan and Nephthaleim : 
and the sons of Zelpha, Leia's handmaid, Gad and Aser. 

26 These were t the sons of Jacob, who were born to him in Sy- 
rian Mesopotamia. Then Jacob went to his father Isaak, to 
Mambre, a city of the plain, the same is Chebron in the land 

28 of Chanaan, where Abraham and Isaak had sojourned. Now 
the days which Isaak lived were one hundred and eighty 
years. And Isaak fainting away died and was added to his 



!-!-! XXXVI. GENESIS. 

race being an old man and full of days : and his sons Esau 
and Jacob buried him. 
XXXVI. Now these are the families of Esau, the same is 
Edom. Esau took to himself wives from the daughters of the 
Chananites — Ada the daughter of Ailom the Chettite ; and 
Olibema the daughter of Ana, the son of Sebegon the Evite ; 
3 and Basemath, Ismael's daughter, the sister of Nabaioth. And 
Ada bore him Eliphas; and Basemath bore Baguel; and Oli- 

5 bema bore Jeous and Jeglom and Kore. These were the sons 
of Esau who were born to him in the land of Chanaan. 

6 And Esau took his wives and his sons and his daughters and 
all the persons belonging to his family, and all his substance, 
and all his cattle, and all that he possessed, and all that he had 
gotten in the land of Chanaan, and went out from the land of 

7 Chanaan, from the face of his brother Jacob : for their sub- 
stance was too great for them to dwell together, and the land 
where they sojourned could not support them on account of 
the abundance of their stock. And Esau made his abode on 
mount Seir. Esau is the same as Edom. 

9 Now these are the families of Esau, the father of the Edoin- 
ites, on mount Seir. And these are the names of Esau's sons 
— Eliphas son of Ada, Esau's wife ; and Baguel, son of Base- 
math, Esau's wife. 

11 And the sons of Eliphas were Thaiman, Omar, Sophar, 

12 Gotham and Kenez. And Thamna was a concubine of Eli- 
jxhas, the son of Esau, and she bore to Eliphas, Amalek. 
These were the children of Ada the wife of Esau. 

13 And these are the sons of Baguel, Nachoth, Zare, Some 
and Mose. These were the children of Basemath, the wife of 
Esau. 

14 And these are the children of Olibema the daughter of 
Ana, the son of Sebegon, the wife of Esau. She bore to Esau, 
Jeous and Jeglom and Kore. 

15 These were the emirs of son Esau. The sons of Eliphas, 
Esau's first born. Emir Thaiman, emir Omar, emir Sophar, 
emir Kenez, emir Kore, emir Gothom, emir Amelek. These 
were the emirs of Eliphas in the land of Idumea. These were 

17 the children of Ada. And these were sons of Baguel, son of 
Esau, emir Nachoth, emir Zare, emir Some, emir Mose. 



!-!-! KXXVI. GENESIS. 

These were the emirs of Kaguel in the land of Edom. These 
18 were the children of Basemath, the wife of Esau. And these 
were the sons of Olibema the wife of Esau, emir Jeous, emir 
Jeglom, emir Kore. These were the emirs of Olibema, the 
daughter of Ana, Esau's wife. These were the children of 
Esau and these their Emirs. They are the Edomites. 

20 Now these were sons of Seir the Chorrite, the inhabitant 

21 of the land, Lotan, Sobal, Sebegon, Ana, and Deson, and Asar, 
and Rison. These were the emirs of the Chorrite — of son Seir 

22 in the land of Edom. And these were the sons of Lotan, Chor- 

23 ri and Aiman, and the sister of Lotan, Thainna. And these 
were the sons of Sobal, Golain and Manachath and Gaibel and 

24 Sophar and Omar. And these were the sons of Sebegon, Aie 
and Ana. This is that Ana who found the Jameins in the wil- 

25 derness, when he was feeding his father Sebegon's asses. And 
these were sons of Ana ; Deson and Olibema a daughter of 

26 Ana : And these were the sons of Deson, Amada and Asban 

27 and Ithran and Charran. And these were the sons of Asar, 

28 Balaam and Zoukani and Joukam. And these were the sons 
Rison, Os and Aran. 

29 And these were the emirs of the Chorrites, emir Lotan, 
emir Sobal, emir Sebegon, emir Ana, emir Deson, emir Asar, 
emir Rison. These were the emirs of the Chorrites in their 
clans in the land of Edom. 

31 And these were the kings who reigned in Edom before a 

32 king reigned in Israel; Balak son of Beor reigned in Edom 

33 and the name of his city was Donnaba ; and when Balak died, 

34 Jobab son of Zara of Bosorra reigned in his stead; and when 
Jobab died, Asom of the land of the Thaimanites reigned in 

35 his stead ; and when Asom died, Adad son of Barad who 
smote Madiam in the plain of Moab reigned in his stead and 

36 the name of his city was Gethaim. And when Adad died, Sa- 

37 macla of Masekka reigned in his stead ; and when Samada 
died, Saul of Rooboth which is by the river reigned in his 

38 stead ; and when Saul died, Ballenon son of Achobar reign- 
ed in his stead ; and when Ballenon son of Achobar died, 

31) Arad son of Barad reigned in his stead ; and the name of his 
city was Phogor, and his wife's name, Metebeel. She was a 
daughter of ITatraith, son of Maizoob. 



!-!-! XXXVII. GENESIS. 

40 These are the names of the einirs of Esau in their tribes 
according to their place in their countries and their nations ; 

41 Emir of Thamna, emir of Grola, emir of Jether, emir of Olibe- 

42 mas, emir of Elas ; emir of Phinon, emir of Kenez, emir of 
Thaiman, emir of Mazar, emir of Magediel, emir of Zaphoin. 

43 These are the emirs of Edom in their respective abodes in 
the land of their possession. Esau and father Edom is the 
same. 

XXXVII. Now Jacob dwelt in the land where his father had 
sojourned in the land of Chanaan ; and this is the history of 

2 Jacob's posterity. When Joseph was seventeen years of age 
and feeding his father's sheep with his brothers, as he was 
young, namely with the sons of Balla and the sons of Zelpha 
his father's wives, they carried an ill report against Joseph to 

3 Israel their father. Now Jacob loved Joseph above all his chil- 
dren because he was the son of his old age ; and he had made 

4 him a robe of different colours. So when his brothers saw that 
their father loved him more than all his sons, they hated him 

5 and could not speak peaceably to him. Besides Joseph hav- 
ing dreamed a dream told it to his brothers and said to them, 

6 Hear this dream which I have dreamed. I thought we were 

7 binding sheaves in the middle of a field ; and my sheaf arose 
and stood upright, and your sheaves being ranged around 

8 made obeisance to my sheaf. Upon which his brothers said 
to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us or have dominion over 

9 us ? So they hated him still more for his dreams and for his 
words. And he had another dream and told this to his father 
and his brothers and said, Behold, I have dreamed another 
dream, as if the sun and the moon and eleven stars made obei- 

10 sauce to me. Upon which his father rebuked him saying, 
What is this dream which thou hast dreamed ? What ! Shall I 
and thy mother and thy brothers come and bow down to thee 

11 on the ground ? So his brothers envied him ; but his father pon- 

12 dered the matter. After this his brothers having gone to Sy- 

13 chem to feed their father's flocks, Israel said to Joseph, Are 
not thy brothers tending the flocks at Sychem ? Come, let me 
send thee to them. And he said, I am ready. Whereupon Israel 
said to him, Gro and see if thy brothers and the flocks be well 

14 and bring me word. So lie despatched him from the valley of 



Oh. XXXVII. GENESIS. 

Che bron and he went to Sychem : and a man found him wand- 

15 ering in the plain. And the man asked him saying, What art 

16 thou seeking ? To which he replied, I am seeking my brothers, 

17 tell me where they are feeding. And the man said to him, They 
have removed from this place ; for I heard them say, Let us go 

18 to Dothaim. So Joseph went after his brothers and found them 
at Dothaim. Now when they saw him at a great distance be- 
fore he came near them, they wickedly thought of killing him 

19 and said one to another, Behold the dreamer is coming. Now 

20 therefore come let us kill him and throw him into one of these 

21 pits, and we will say a savage beast hath devoured him. And let 
us see what will become of his dreams. But when Keuben heard 
he rescued him out of their hands and said, Let us not touch his 

22 life. Keuben indeed said to them, Shed not blood. Throw 
him into one of these pits in the wilderness, but lay not a hand 
on him, in order that he might rescue him out of their hands 

23 and deliver him to his father. So when Joseph came to his 
brothers they stripped him of the variegated robe which he had 

24 on and took him and threw him into the pit. But the pit was 

25 empty. It had no water. Then they sat down to eat bread. 
And raising their eyes they looked ; and lo ! Ismaelite travel- 
lers were coming out of Galaad and their camels were loaded 
with spiceries, with balm and stacte, which they were carry - 

26 ing to Egypt. Thereupon Judas said to his brothers, What 
advantage will it be though we slay our brother and conceal 

27 his blood ? Come let us sell him to these Ismaelites and let not 
our hands be upon him, for he is our brother and our flesh. 

28 So his brothers hearkened to him. And when the Madienite 
merchants came, they drew him up. They lifted Joseph up 
out of the pit and sold him to the Ismaelites for twenty pieces 

29 of gold ; and they carried Joseph down to Egypt. Now when 

30 Reuben came back to the pit and did not see Joseph in it, he 
rent his cloaths and returned to his brothers and said, The 

31 boy is gone. And as for me where now am I to go ? Then they 
took Joseph's coat, and having killed a kid of the goats they 
besmeared the coat with the blood and sent away the varie- 
gated robe and had it carried to his father and said, This we 

32 found. Examine whether it be thy son's robe or not. And he 

33 knew it and said, It is my son's robe. An evil beast hath de- 



!-!-! XXXVIII. GENESIS. 

34 voured him. A wild beast hath torn Joseph. Then Jacob rent 
his cloaths and put on sackcloth on his loins and mourned for 

35 his son many days. And all his sons and daughters assembled 
and came to comfort him, but he would not be comforted say- 
ing, I will go to my son mourning, to the mansion of the dead. 

36 Thus his father mourned for him. But the Madienites sold 
Joseph in Egypt to Petephres the chamberlain of Pharao, the 
captain of the guards. 

XXXVIII. Now at that time Judas went down from his 
brothers and came to a certain Odollamite whose name was 

2 Eiras. And Judas saw there a daughter of a Chananite, her 

3 name was Sava. And he took her and went in unto her and 

4 she conceived and bore a son and called his name Er. And 
she conceived again and bore a son and called his name Au- 

5 nan. And she bore another son and called his name Selom. 

6 Now she was at Chasbi when she bore them. And for Er his 

7 first born Judas took a wife whose name was Thamar. But 
Er the first born of Judas was wicked in the sight of the Lord, 

8 and G-od slew him. Whereupon Judas said to Aunan, Go in 
unto thy brother's wife and be a husband to her and raise up 

9 a seed for thy brother. But when Aunan knew that the seed 
would not be his, it came to pass that when he went in unto his 
brother's wife he shed it on the ground; that he might not 

10 give seed to his brother. And it appeared evil in the sight of 
God that he had done this, therefore he caused him also to die. 

11 Then Judas said to Thamar his daughter in law, Continue a 
widow in thy father's house till my son Selom grow up. For 

12 he said, Peradventure he also may die as his brothers did. So 
Thamar went and dwelt at her father's house. But the time 
was prolonged and Sava the wife of Judas died. And when Ju- 
das was comforted he went up to his sheep shearers, he and his 

13 shepherd Eiras the Odollamite, to Thamna. And it was told 
Thamar his daughter in law saying, Lo ! thy father in law is 

14 going up to Thamna to shear his sheep. Whereupon she put off 
the robes of her widowhood and put on a veil and adorned her- 
self and sat near the gates of Ainan in the way to Thamna. 
For she saw that Selom was grown up and that Jie had not 

15 given her to him for a wife. And when Judas saw her, he 
thought she was a harlot, for she had covered her face and he 



!-!-! XXXIX. GENESIS. 

16 did not know her. So he turned aside to her and said to her, 
Let rne come in unto thee. For he did not know that she was 

17 his daughter in law. And she said, What wilt thou give me if 
thou come in unto me ? To which he replied, I will send thee 
a kid of the goats from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give 

18 me a pledge, till thou send it ? And he said, What pledge shall 
I give thee ? And she said, Thy ring and bracelet and the staff 
in thy hand. So he gave them to her, and went in unto her, and 

19 she conceived by him. Then she arose and went away, and 
took off her veil and put on the garments of her widowhood. 

20 And Judas sent the kid of the goats by the hands of his shep- 
herd the Odollamite to receive from the woman the pledge. 

21 But he not finding her asked the men of the place, Where is 
the harlot that was at Ainan by the way side ? And they said, 

22 There was not a harlot there. Thereupon he returned to Ju- 
das and said, I have not found her. And the men of the place 

23 said there was not a harlot there. Then Judas said, Let her 
keep them. But perhaps we may be laughed at. I indeed sent 

24 the kid. Thou however hast not found her. Now after three 
months it was told Judas saying, Thamar thy daughter in law 
hath played the harlot, and lo ! she is with child by her whore- 
dom. Whereupon Judas said, Bring her out and let her be 

25 burned. And when she was brought out she sent to her father 
in law saying, By the man to whom these belong I am with 
child. Moreover she said, Examine, whose is this ring and 

26 this bracelet and this staff? And Judas acknowledged them 
and said, Thamar hath more justice on her side than I, be- 
cause I did not give her to my son Selom. And he proceeded 

27 no more to have knowledge of her. And when the time of 

28 her delivery came she had twins. And when she was in child 
birth, one put forth its hand, and the midwife took and tied a 
scarlet thread about its hand, saying, This will be the first 

29 born. But when it had drawn back its hand, his brother im- 
mediately came forth. Whereupon she said, What ! Hath 
there been a breach made for thee ? So she called his name 

30 Phares. And after this his brother came forth, on whose hand 
was the scarlet thread. So she called his name Zara. 

XXXIX. Now when Joseph was brought to Egypt, Pete- 
phres the chamberlain of Pharao, the captain of the guards, 

VOL.' I. I 



!-!-! XXXIX. GENESIS. 

an Egyptian, bought him at the hands of the Israelites, who had 

2 brought him thither. And the Lord was with Joseph, so that 
he was a fortunate man and was in the same house with his 

3 master the Egyptian. And his master perceived that the Lord 
was with him, and that the Lord prospered in his hands what- 

4 ever he did. So Joseph found favour in the sight of his mas- 
ter ; and he was pleased with him and set him over his 
household and committed all that he had to Joseph's charge. 

5 And after he had made him overseer of his household, and 
over all that he had, the Lord blessed the house of the Egyp- 
tian for Joseph's sake ; and there was a blessing of the Lord on 

6 all his substance, in his house and in his field. So he left to 
Joseph's management all that he had, and knew not any thing 
he had save the bread which he ate. 

7 Now Joseph was a comely j)erson an( j f a very beautiful 
countenance, and after these things his master's wife cast her 

8 eyes on Joseph and said, Lie with me ; but he refused and 
said to his master's wife, Seeing my lord, on account of his 
confidence in me, knoweth not any thing in his house, and 

9 hath committed to my charge all that he hath and there is none 
in the family superior to me, nor any thing withheld from me, 
except thyself because thou art his wife ; how then can I do this 

10 wicked act and commit sin in the presence of God. And when 
she had spoken to Joseph day after day and he hearkened not 

11 to her to lie down with her to have commerce with her, it 
came to pass that one day when Joseph went into the house to 

12 transact his business and none of the domestics were within, 

13 she took hold of his mantle saying, Lie with me. But he leav- 
ing his mantle in her hands fled and went out. And when she 
saw that he had left his mantle in her hands and had fled and 

14 was gone, she called those who were in the house and spoke 
to them saying, See ! He hath brought in amongst us a He- 
brew slave to insult us. He came to me saying, Lie with me. 

15 But I cried Avith a loud voice. And when he heard that I 
raised my voice and cried aloud he left his mantle with me, 

16 fled and went out. And she kept the garment by her till his 

17 master came home and spoke to him in like terms saying, The 
Hebrew slave whom thou hast brought in amongst us came 
in to me to insult me and said to me, Let me lie with thee. 



!-!-! XL. GENESIS. 

18 But when he heard that I raised rny voice and cried aloud ; 

19 leaving his mantle with me he fled and went out. When his 
master heard the words of his wife, which she spoke saying, 
In this manner did thy slave treat me, he was greatly incensed. 

20 So Joseph's master took and cast him into prison — into the 

21 place where the king's prisoners were confined. But in the 
prison the Lord was with Joseph, and continued his kindness 
and gave him favour in the sight of the principal keeper of the 

22 prison. And the principal keeper of the prison committed to 
Joseph's care the prison and all the prisoners who were in 
the prison. And whatever was done there, he was the person 

23 who caused it to be done. The principal keeper took no cog- 
nizance of any thing himself ; for all things were committed to 
Joseph's management, because the Lord was with him, and the 
Lord prospered in his hands whatever he did. 

XL. Now alter these things it happened that the chief butler 
of the king of Egypt and the chief baker offended their lord the 

2 king of Egypt. And Pharao was incensed against his two offi- 

3 cers, against the chief butler and against the chief baker and 
sent them under a guard to prison — to the place to which Jo- 

I seph had been sent. And the keeper of the prison committed 

5 them to Joseph and he attended them. And when they had 
been there some days in prison, they both had a dream, in the 
same night. And the appearance of the dream both of the chief 
butler and the chief baker, who belonged to the king of Egypt 

6 and were in prison, was similar. And in the morning when 

7 Joseph went in to them he saw that they were troubled. AYhere- 
upon he asked the officers of Pharao who were confined with 
him at his master's, saying, Why are your countenances sad 

8 to day? And they said to him, We have had a dream and 
there is none to interpret it. And Joseph said, Is not the inter- 

9 pretation thereof from God ? Therefore tell me. So the chief 
butler told Joseph his dream and said, In my sleep there was a 

10 vine before me, and on the vine three branches and one was 
flourishing and had produced clusters, and the grapes of one 

11 cluster were ripe. And I had in my hand the cup of Pharao. 
So I took the bunch and squeezed it into the cup and gave the 

12 cup into Pharao's hand. Thereupon Joseph said to him, This 
is the interpretation of it. The three branches are three days. 



!-!-! XLI. GENESIS. 

13 Three days hence Pharao will take cognizance of thy adminis- 
tration and restore thee to thy office of cup bearer, and thou shalt 
give Pharao's cup into his hand according to thy former dignity, 

14 when thou wast butler. But think of me by thy own case, 
when it shall be well with thee ; and do me the favour to men- 

15 tion me to Pharao and release me from this prison. For I have 
been stolen from the land of the Hebrews ; and here I have 
done nothing, yet they have thrown me into this dungeon. 

16 And when the chief baker saw that he interpreted well he said 
to Joseph, I also had a dream, I thought I was carrying on my 
head three baskets of cakes, and in the uppermost basket, 

17 pastry of all the sorts which Pharao eateth. And the birds of 
the air devoured those in the uppermost basket on my head. 

18 And Joseph answered and said to him, This is the interpre- 
tation thereof. The three baskets are three days. Three days 

19 hence Pharao will take off thy head and hang thee on a gibbet 

20 and the birds of the air will devour thy flesh. Accordingly it 
fell out, that the third day was Pharao's birth day, and he 
made an entertainment for all his servants and took cognizance 
of the administration of the butler, and the administration of 

21 the baker in the midst of his servants. And he restored the 
butler to his office, and he gave the cup into Pharao's hand. 
But the chief baker he hanged as Joseph had interpreted to 

22 them. Yet the chief butler made no mention of Joseph, but 
passed him over in oblivion. 

XLI. But it happened that at the end of two years Pharao had 

2 a dream. He thought he was standing by the river ; and lo ! 
there came up out of the river seven cows of a beautiful figure 

3 and very fat; and they fed on the sedge. And seven other 
cows came up after them out of the river, ill favoured and lean ; 

4 and they fed near the other cows on the bank of the river ; and 
the seven ill favoured and lean cows devoured the seven cows 
which were of a beautiful figure and full of flesh. And Pharao 
awoke. 

5 Again he dreamed a second time ; and lo ! seven ears of 

6 corn sprang upon one stalk, choice and good : and lo ! seven 

7 ears thin and blasted sprang up after them. And the seven thin 
and blasted ears devoured the seven ears which were choice 

8 and full. And Pharao awoke ; and it was a dream. And in the 



!-!-! XLI. GENESIS. 

morning his spirit was troubled, and he sent for all the inter- 
preters of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof, and told them 
his dream, but there was none who could interpret it to Pharao. 
9 Upon this the chief butler spoke to Pharao, saying, I this day 

10 acknowledge my fault. Pharao was angry with his servants, 
and ordered us to be confined in the house of the captain of 

11 the guards — both me and the chief baker. And both I and he 
had a dream the same night, each had a dream regarding hini- 

12 self. And there was there with us a youth, a Hebrew servant 
of the captain of the guard, and we told him, and he interpret- 

13 ed to us. And it fell out as he interpreted to us— I was restor- 

14 ed to my office ; but he was hanged. Upon this Pharao sent 
for Joseph, and they brought him out of the prison. And when 
they had shaved him and changed his raiment, he came to 

15 Pharao. And Pharao said to Joseph, I have had a dream and 
there is none who can interpret it. But I have heard people 
say of thee, that upon hearing dreams thou canst interpret 

16 them. In reply to which, Joseph said to Pharao, Without God 

17 no answer of peace can be given to Pharao. Then Pharao 
spoke to Joseph saying, In my sleep I thought I was standing 

18 near the edge of the river ; and there came up as it were out 
of the river, seven cows of a beautiful figure, and very fat ; and 

19 they fed on the sedge. And lo ! seven other cows came up 
after them, out of the river, ugly and ill favoured and lean of 
flesh ; such that I never saw worse in all the land of Egypt. 

20 And the seven ill favoured and lean cows devoured the first se- 

21 ven cows which were choice and good. But though they de- 
voured them, they gave no sign of fuluess. Their appearance 
was as ugly as before. 

22 Then I awoke and again went to sleep, and in my sleep 1 
again saw as if seven ears of corn sprang up, on one stalk, full 

23 and good ; and adjoining them seven other ears sprang up, 

24 thin and blasted. And the seven thin and blasted ears devour- 
ed the seven ears which were full and good. Now I have told 
the interpreters ; but there is not one who can interpret this to 

25 me. Then Joseph said to Pharao, The dream of Pharao is one. 

26 God hath shewn Pharao what he is about to do. The seven 
beautiful cows are seven years ; and the seven good ears are 

27 seven years. The dream of Pharao is one. The seven lean 



!-!-! XLI. GENESIS. 

cows also which came up after them are seven years ; and the 
seven thin and blasted ears are seven years. There shall be 

28 seven years of famine. This is the thing which I have said to 

29 Pharao, God hath shewn Pharao what he is about to do. Be- 
hold seven years are coming of great plenty in all the land of 

30 Egypt. But after these there will come seven years of famine. 
And they will cause the coming plenty to be forgotten in all 

31 Egypt. And the famine will consume the land, so that the 
plenty will not be known in the land, by reason of the famine 

32 which will come after it : for it will be very great. And in as 
much as the dream of Pharao was doubled, the thing which 
God had determined will surely come to pass ; and God is 

33 hasting to do it. Now therefore look out for a man of pru- 
dence and understanding, and set him over the land of Egypt. 

34 And let Pharao appoint and set governors of districts over the 
whole land, and let them send in a fifth of all the products of 

35 the land of Egypt, during the seven years of plenty, and col- 
lect all the eatables of those seven good years which are com- 
ing. And let food be collected under the care of Pharao, and 

36 eatables stored in the cities. So shall food be kept in the coun- 
try, against the seven years of famine which will be in the land 
of Egypt, and the country will not be wasted with the famine. 

37 And the advice was agreeable in the view of Pharao and in 

38 the view of all his servants. And Pharao said to all his ser- 
vants, Can we find such a man as this who hath in him the 

39 spirit of God ? Then Pharao said to Joseph, Seeing God hath 
shewn thee all these things, there is none more prudent and 

40 wise than thou thyself. Thou shalt be over my household and 
to thy command all my people shall pay obedience. Only on 

41 the throne will I be greater than thou. Moreover Pharao said 
to Joseph, Behold I have set thee this day over all the land of 

42 Egypt, And Pharao took off the ring from his own hand and 
put it on Joseph's hand, and clothed him with a cotton robe, 
and put a chain of gold about his neck ; and caused him to 

43 mount a chariot next to that of his own. And a herald made 
proclamation before him. And when he had set him over all 

44 the land of Egypt, Pharao said to Joseph, I am Pharao. With- 
out thee no man shall lift up his hand in all the land of Egypt. 

45 And Pharao called Joseph's name Psonthomphanech and gave 



!-!-! XL II. GENESIS. 

him Aseneth a daughter of Petephres the priest of Heliopolis 
to be his wife. 

46 Now Joseph was thirty years old, when he stood before Pha- 
rao king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence 

47 of Pharao and went through all the land of Egypt. And in the 
seven years of plenty the land produced in vast abundance and 

48 he collected all the varieties of food of those seven years, in 
which there was plenty in the land of Egypt and stored it in 

49 the cities. In every city he stored the eatable productions of 
the fields around. So Joseph collected food like the sand of the 
sea in great abundance until it could not be numbered, for it 

50 was innumerable. Now before the seven years of famine Joseph 
had two sons, whom Aseneth the daughter of Petephres the 

51 priest of Heliopolis bore to him. And Joseph called the name 
of his first born Manasses, because God hath made me forget 

52 all my troubles and all my father's family. And the name of 
his second son he called Ephraim, because God hath made me 
fruitful in the land of my affliction. 

53 And when the seven years of plenty which had been in 
the land of Egypt were past, the seven years of famine began 

54 to come as Joseph said. And there was a famine in the whole 

55 earth, but in all the land of Egypt there was bread. And when 
all the land of Egypt began to be in want and the people cried 
to Pharao for bread, Pharao said to all the Egyptians, Go to 
Joseph and do whatever he saith to you. 

56 As the famine was over the face of the whole earth, when 
Joseph opened all his granaries and sold to all the Egyptians, 
all the countries came to Egypt to buy of Joseph, for the fa- 

XLIL mine was great in the whole earth. And when Jacob 
found that there was a sale in Egypt he said to his sons, Why 

2 sit ye still ? Behold I have heard that there is corn in Egypt ; 
go down thither and buy us a little food that we may live and 

3 not die. So Joseph's ten brothers went down to purchase corn 
from Egypt : but Benjamin the brother of Joseph he did not 

4 send with his brothers ; for he said, Perhaps some misfortune 
may happen to him. 

5 Now when the sons of Israel went to buy in company with 
others who were going, for the famine was in the land of Cha- 

6 naan, Joseph was the governor of the country ; he sold to all 



!-!-! XLTI. GENESIS. 

the people of that land. So when Joseph's brothers came they 

7 made obeisance to him with their face to the ground. And 
when Joseph saw his brothers he knew them and was reserv- 
ed and spoke harshly to them and said to them, Whence come 
you ? And they said, From the land of Chanaan to buy food. 

8 Now Joseph knew his brothers, but they did not know him. 

9 And Joseph remembered the dreams, which he had dreamed 
and said to them, You are spies. You are come to examine 

10 the ways into this country. And they said, No, my lord. We 

11 thy servants are come to buy food. We are all the sons of one 

12 man. W r e are men of peace. Thy servants are not spies. But 
he said, Nay, you are come for no other purpose, but to ex- 

13 amine the ways into this country. Then they said, Thy ser- 
vants were twelve brothers in the land of Chanaan. And lo ! 
the youngest is now with our father ; but the other is no more. 

14 Upon this Joseph said, It is as I said, you are spies. By this 

15 you shall be proved. By the health of Pharao you shall not 

16 depart hence unless your youngest brother come hither. Send 
one of you and bring your brother ; but you must be con- 
fined, until your words be proved whether you speak true or 

17 not. If not, by the health of Pharao you are certainly spies. 

18 So he committed them to prison three days. And on the third 

19 day he said to them, Do this and live ; for I fear God. If you 
are men of peace let one brother of you be kept in confinement. 

20 As for the rest, go and carry back your purchase of provisions 
and bring your younger brother to me, so shall your words be 

21 believed. Unless you do this you shall die. On this occasion 
they acted thus— they said one to another, We indeed are to 
blame in respect to our brother. Because we disregarded the 

22 anguish of his soul, when he intreated us and we would not 
hear him ; for this cause therefore this affliction is come upon 
us. And Keuben in reply said to them, Did I not speak to 
you saying, Do the lad no injury, but you hearkened not to 

23 me. Now behold inquisition is made for his blood. They in- 
deed did not know that Joseph heard; for there was one to 

24 interpret between them. On this Joseph withdrew from them 
and wept. Then he came to them again and spoke to them 
and he took Symeon from among them and bound him before 

25 their eyes. Then Joseph gave orders to fill their sacks with 



Oh. XLIIL GENESIS. 

corn and to put every one's money in his bag and to furnish 

2b* them with provisions for the journey. So this being done for 

them they loaded their asses with the corn, and departed thence. 

27 And one of them having loosed his bag to give his asses pro- 
vender at a place where they lodged saw his roll of money, for 

28 it was in the mouth of his bag, and said to his brothers, The 
money is returned to me. See, here it is in my bag. Where- 
upon their heart fainted and they were alarmed and said one 

29 to another, What is this which God hath done to us ? And 
when they came to their father Jacob to the land of Chanaan, 

30 they told him all that had happened to them and said, The 
man the lord of the country spoke harshly to us and put us in 

31 prison as coming to spy the country ; and we told him, We 

32 are men of peace, We are not spies. We are twelve brothers, 
sons of one father. One is no more. And the youngest is now 

33 with our father in the land of Chanaan. Upon which the man 
the lord of the country said to us, By this I shall know that 
you are men of peace. Leave here with me one brother ; and 
taking the corn purchased for your family go and bring me 

34 your younger brother, then I shall know that you are not 
spies ; but men of peace. And I will restore to you your bro- 

35 ther and you may traffick in the land. And when they emptied 
their sacks every one's roll of money was in their several sacks. 
And when they and their father saw their rolls of money they 

36 were terrified. And Jacob their father said to them, Me you 
have bereaved of children. Joseph is gone. Symeon is gone. 
And will you take away Benjamin ? All these things are against 

37 me. Then Reuben spoke to their father saying, Slay my two 
sons, if I bring him not back to thee. Commit him to my 

38 charge and I will bring him back to thee. But he said, My 
son shall not go down with you. For his brother is dead and 
he alone is left. If any mischief should happen to him in the 
way you are going, you will bring down my old age with sor- 
row to the mansion of the dead. 

XLIIL Still the famine prevailed in the land. So when they had 

2 eaten up the corn which they brought from Egypt their father 

3 said to them, Go again and buy for us a little food. AVhere- 
upon Judas spoke to him and said, The man who is the lord of 
the country solemnly protested saying, You shall not see my 

VOL. I. K 



Cb. XLIIT. GENESIS. 

4 face, unless your youngest brother be with you. If therefore 
thou wilt send our brother with us we will go down and buy 
thee food. But if thou wilt not send our brother with us we 

5 will not go. For the man spoke to us saying, You shall not see 

6 my face unless your youngest brother be with you. And Is- 
rael said, Why did you do me this ill in telling the man that 

7 you had a brother? And they said, The man examined us 
strictly touching our family and said, Is your father alive? And 
have you a brother ? And we answered him according to this 
examination. Could we know that he would say, Bring your 

8 brother ? Moreover Judas said to his father Israel, Send thy 
son with me and we will arise and go that we may live and not 

9 die, both we and thou and all that we have. I undertake the 
charge of him. At my hand require him. If I bring him not 
back to thee and set him before thee let me be a sinner against 

10 thee for ever. For if we had not been delayed we might have 

11 now been back a second time. Then Israel their father said to 
them, If it must be so, do this, Take of all the fruits of this 
land in your vessels and carry down for the man presents of 
balm and honey and incense both stacte and terebinthus and 

12 almonds. Take also double money in your hands and carry 
back the money which was returned in your sacks ; perhaps it 

13 was a mistake. And take your brother and arise and go down 

14 to the man. And may my God grant you favour in the sight 
of the man that he may send back your brother with Benjamin. 
As for me I am bereaved of children as I have been bereaved. 

15 So the men took the presents and the double money in their 
hands and Benjamin and arose and went down to Egypt and 

16 stood before Joseph. And when Joseph saw them and Benja- 
min his brother by the same mother he said to his steward, 
conduct these men into the house and kill victims and make 

17 ready, for these men are to dine with me at noon. So the man 
did as Joseph ordered and conducted them to Joseph's house. 

18 And when the men saw that they were conducted to Joseph's 
house, they said, On account of the money which was return- 
ed in our bags in the former journey we are brought in for the 
purpose of accusing us and charging us with it, that he may 

19 make us slaves and take our asses. Therefore they went near 
to the man the steward of Joseph's house and spoke to him at 



!-!-! XLIV. GENESIS. 

20 the gate of the house saying, Sir, we caine down for the first 

21 time to purchase provisions, hut when we came to the lodging 
place and opened our bags every man's money was in his bag. 
This money we have now brought back in our hands in full weight. 
And we have brought with us other money to buy provisions — 

22 Who put the money into our bags we do not know. Upon 

23 which he said to them, Peace be to you : fear not, your God 
and the God of your fathers hath given you treasures in your 
bags. But as for your money, with perfect good will I decline 

24 receiving it. Then he brought out Symeon to them and 
brought them water to wash their feet and gave provender to 

25 their asses. And they were employed in making ready the 
presents until Joseph came at noon, for they heard that he was to 

26 dine there. So when Joseph came home they brought him the 
presents which they had in their hands into the house and made 

27 obeisance to him with their face on the ground. And he asked 

28 them of their welfare and said to them, Is your father well, 
the old man of whom you spoke ? Is he still living ? And they 
said, Thy servant, our father is well. He is still alive. And 
he said, Blessed of God is that man. Whereupon they bowed 

29 down and made obeisance to him. And when Joseph raised his 
eyes and saw Benjamin his brother by the same mother, he 
said, This is your youngest brother whom you promised to 
bring to me ? Then he said, God be gracious to thee, my son. 

30 And Joseph was discomposed, for his bowels yearned towards 
his brother ; so he sought where to weep and went into his 

31 chamber and wept there. And when he had washed his face 
and come out he restrained himself and said, Serve up dinner. 

32 So they served up for him by himself and for them by them- 
selves, and for the Egyptians who dined with him, by them- 
selves. For the Egyptians could not eat bread with the He- 

33 brews. For that to the Egyptians is an abomination. And they 
sat before him, the first born according to his birth right and 
the youngest according to his youth. And the men were asto- 

31 nished, one at another. And when they received their several 
messes from him, the mess of Benjamin was five times larger 
than any of theirs. 

XLIV. And when they had drank and been plentifully regaled 
with him Joseph gave orders to the steward of his house say- 



!-!-! XLIV. GENESIS. 

ing, Fill the bags of these men with corn, as much as they 

2 can carry, and put every one's money in the mouth of his bag, 
and put my silver cup in the bag of the youngest along with 

3 the price of his corn. And Joseph's orders being punctually 
executed ; the next morning as soon as it was light the men 

4 were sent away they and their asses. And when they were gone 
out of the city, but had not got far off, Joseph said to his stew- 
ard, Arise and pursue those men ; and when thou shalt over- 

5 take them, say to them, Why have you returned evil for good ? 
Why have you stolen my silver cup ? Is not this it out of which 
my lord drinketh. By it indeed he diviueth. You have done 

6 evil in so doing. So when he overtook them he spoke to them 

7 in these terms. Upon which they said to him, Why doth my 
lord speak in such terms as these : Far be it from thy servants 

8 to do such an act. If we indeed brought back to thee from 
the land of Chanaan the money which we found in our bags, 
how should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold ? 

9 With whomsoever of thy servants thou shalt find the cup, let 

10 him die, and we will be our lord's slaves. And he said, Well ; 
Let it be as you say thus far — With whomsoever the cup be 

11 found, he shall be my slave ; but you shall be blameless. Then 
they hasted, and set down, every one his bag on the ground, 

12 and opened, every one his bag. And he searched beginning at 
the eldest till he came to the youngest ; and he found the cup 

13 in Benjamin's bag. Whereupon they rent their cloaths and put 

14 every one his bag on his ass and returned to the city. And 
Judas with his brothers went in to Joseph who was still there ; 

15 and they fell on the ground before him. And Joseph said to 
them, What is this you have done? Did you not know that 

16 such a man as I can divine? And Judas said, What answer 
can we make to my lord ? Or what can we say ? Or how 
can we justify ourselves ? God hath indeed found out the ini- 
quity of thy servants. Behold we are slaves to our lord — both 

17 we and he with whom the cup was found. And Joseph said, 
Far be it from me to do such a thing. The man with whom 
the cup was found shall be my servant ; but as for you go up 

18 in peace to your father. Upon this Judas came near to him 
and said, my lord, let thy servant speak a word in thy pre- 
sence and be not angry with thy servant, for thou art next to 



!-!-! XLV. GENESIS. 

19 Pharao. Thou my lord didst ask thy servants saying, Have 

20 yon a father or a brother ? And we said to my lord, We have 
a father an old man ; and he hath a younger son of his old age. 
His brother is dead, and as he is the only one of his mother 

21 left ; his father loveth him. Then thou saidst to thy servants, 

22 Bring him down to me and I will take care of him. And we 
said to my lord, This son cannot leave his father ; for if he 

23 were to leave him, his father would die. Then thou saidst to 
thy servants, Unless your younger brother come down with 

24 you, you shall no more be admitted to see my face. So when 
we went up to thy servant our father, we told him the words 

25 of our lord. And when our father said, Go again and buy for 

26 us a little food ; we said, We cannot go. If indeed our young- 
est brother will go down with us, we will go down. For we 
cannot see the man's face unless our youngest brother be with 

27 us. Thereupon thy servant our father said to us, You know 
that my wife bore me two sons ; and that one went out from 

28 me and you said he was devoured by a wild beast and I have 

29 not seen him since. If therefore you take this one also from 
me and any misfortune happen to him on the journey, you will 

30 bring down my old age with sorrow to the grave. Now there- 
fore if I should go to thy servant our father and this son be 
not with us, as his life dependeth on the life of this son, it will 
come to pass that when he shall see that this son is not with 

31 us he will die. Thus will thy servants bring down the old age 

32 of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave. Besides as 
thy servant received this son from his father and said, If I bring 
him not back to thee and set him before thee, let me be as a 

33 sinner against my father for ever ; now therefore let me stay 
with thee instead of him as a slave to my lord, and let this son 

34 go up with his brothers (for how can I go up to my father and 
this son not with us ?) that I may not see the evils which will 
befal my father. 

XLV. Upon this Joseph could not restrain himself before all 
his attendants, but said, Dismiss all from me. So there was 

2 no attendant with Joseph when he made hiinself known to his 
brothers, but in weeping he raised his voice so that all the 
Egyptians heard and the news was carried to Pharao's house, 

3 And Joseph said to his brothers, I am Joseph. Is my father 



!-!-! XLV. GENESIS. 

still alive ? But his brothers could not answer him ; for they 

4 were confounded. Then Joseph said to his brothers, Come 
near to me ? And when they came near ; he said, I am Joseph 

5 your brother whom you sold into Egypt. Now therefore be 
not grieved, nor let it afflict you that you sold me hither; 

6 for Clod sent me before you for life. For this is but the second 
year of famine on the earth and there will be yet five years, in 

7 which there will be neither tillage nor harvest, so that God hath 
sent me before you to preserve for you a remnant on the earth 

8 and to nourish your great remnant. Now therefore it was not you 
who sent me hither, but it was God. And he hath made me like 
a father to Pharao, and lord of all his house and governor of all 

9 the land of Egypt. Haste therefore and go up to my father and 
say to him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me 
ruler of all the land of Egypt. Come down therefore to me and 

10 tarry not. And thou shalt dwelt in the land of Gesem- Arabia 
and be near me ; both thou and thy sons and thy grandsons, 

11 thy flocks and thy herds and all that thou hast. And I will 
nourish thee there, (for the famine will continue five years 
longer) that thou and thy sons and all that belong to thee may 

12 not be consumed. Behold your eyes and the eyes of my bro- 
ther Benjamin see that it is my mouth which speaketh to you. 

13 Therefore tell my father all my glory in Egypt and all that you 

14 see ; and make haste and bring my father down hither. Then 
he fell upon the neck of his brother Benjamin and wept upon 

15 him. And Benjamin wept on his neck. And he kissed all his 
brothers and wept upon them. And after that his brothers con- 
versed with him. 

16 Now when the news spread to Pharao's house saying, Jo- 
seph's brothers are come, Pharao and his servants were re- 

17 joiced. And Pharao said to Joseph, Say to thy brothers, Do 

18 this, Load your beasts and go to the land of Chanaan and 
take up your father and all that you have and come to me and 
I will give you of all the good things of Egypt, and ye shall eat 

19 the fat of the land. And do thou issue these orders, Take 
with you from the land of Egypt waggons for your children 

20 and your wives and take up your father and come; and pay 
no regard to your furniture, for all the good things of Egypt 

21 shall be yours. And the sons of Israel did so. And Joseph 



Oh. XLVI. GENESIS. 

22 gave them waggons as Pharao the king commanded. He gave 
them also provisions for the journey. And to all he gave two 
suits of raiment ; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces 

23 of gold and five distinguished suits of raiment. And he sent 
the like presents to his father together with ten asses which 
carried some of all the good things of Egypt, and ten mules 

24 loaded with bread for his father on the journey. And he dismis- 
sed them : And as they were departing, he said to them, See that 

25 you do not fall out by the way. So they went up out of Egypt 
and came to the land of Chanaan to their father Jacob and told 

26 him saying. Thy son Joseph is alive and he is the governor 
of all the land of Egypt. Whereupon Jacob was absorpt in 

27 thought, for he could not believe them. But when they told 
him all that Joseph had commanded them, and he saw the 
waggons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Ja- 

28 cob their father revived. And Israel said, It is a great thing 
for me that my son Joseph is still alive. 1 will go and see him, 
before I die. 

XLYI. Then Israel removed with all that he had and went to 
Well of the Oath, and offered a sacrifice to the God of his fa- 

2 ther Isaak. And God spoke to Israel in a vision of the night 

3 and said, Jacob ! Jacob ! And he said, Here I am. And God 
said to him, I am the God of thy fathers. Fear not to go down 

4 into Egypt ; for I will make thee there a great nation. I indeed 
will go down with thee into Egypt and I will at last cause 
thee to come up, when Joseph shall have put his hands on 

5 thy eyes. Then Jacob arose from Well of the Oath and the 
sons of Israel put their father, and the baggage and their 
wives in the waggons which Joseph had sent to carry him ; 

6 and taking their stock and all their effects which they had 

7 gotten in the land of Chanaan, Jacob and all his seed with him, 
his sons and his grandsons, his daughters and his granddaugh- 
ters with him went to Egypt. So he brought all his offspring 
to Egypt. 

8 Now these are the names of Israel's children who went 
down to Egypt with their father Jacob. 

Jacob and his Children. 

9 The first born of Jacob was Reuben, and the sons of Reu- 
ben, Enoch and Phallus, Asron and Charmi. 



Cb. XLYI. GENESIS. 

10 And the sons of Symeon, Jemuel and Jainin and Aod and 
Achin and Saar and Saul the son of a Chananitish woman. 

11 And the sons of Levi, Gerson, Kaath and Merari. 

12 And the sons of Judas were Er and Aunan and Seloni and 
Phares and Zara but Er and Aunan died in the land of Cha- 
naan. And the sons of Phares were Esron and Jemuel. 

13 And the sons of Issachar were Thola and Phua and Asum 
and Sambran. 

14 And the sons of Zabulon, Sered and Allon and Achoel. 

15 These were the sons of Leia whom she bore to Jacob in 
Syrian Mesopotamia with Deina his daughter. All the souls, 
sons and daughters were thirty three. 

16 And the sons of Gad ; Saphon and Aggis and Sannis and 
Thasoban and Aodeis and Aroedeis and Areeleis. 

17 And the sons of Aser ; Jemna and Jessua and Jeus and 

18 Baria with Sara their sister. And the sons of Baria ; Chobar 
and Melchiil. These were the children of Zelpha whom La- 
ban gave to his daughter Leia and she bore them to Jacob. 
Sixteen souls. 

19 And the children of Rachel the wife of Jacob were Joseph 

20 and Benjamin. And to Joseph children were born in the land 
of Egypt, whom Aseneth the daughter of Petephres, the priest 
of Heliopolis, bore to him, namely, Manasses and Ephraim. 
And to Manasses, there were sons born, Avhom his concubine 
Syra bore to him, namely, Machir. And Machir begot Galaad. 
And the sons of Ephraim the brother of Manasses were Sou- 
talaam and Taam. And the sons of Soutalaam, Edom. 

21 And the sons of Benjamin were Bala and Bochor and As- 
bel. And to Bala there were sons born, namely, Gera and ISoe- 
man and Achis and Bos and Mamphim, and Gera begot Arad. 

22 These, were the children of Bachel, whom she bore to Jacob. 
All the souls were eighteen. 

23 And the sons of Dan; Asom. And the sons of Nephtha- 
2*4 leim ; Asiel and Goni and Issaar and Sellein. These were the 

25 children of Balla whom Laban gave to his daughter Rachel, 

26 and she bore them to Jacob. All the souls, seven. So all the 
souls who went with Jacob into Egypt, even all who sprung 
from him, exclusive of the wives of Jacob's children — All the 

27 souls were sixty six. And including the children of Joseph who 



!-!-! XLVII. GENESIS. 

were born to hiui in the land of Egypt, being nine, all the souls 
of Jacob's house who came with Jacob into Egypt were se- 
venty five. 

28 Now he had sent Judas before him to Joseph, that he 

29 might meet him at Heroopolis, in the land of Harnesses. And 
Joseph having got ready his chariots, went up to meet his fa- 
ther Israel at Heroopolis. And when he saw him he fell on his 

30 neck and wept abundantly. And Israel said to Joseph, Now- 
let me die, since I have seen thy face, for thou art still alive. 

31 Then Joseph said to his brothers, I will go up and inform Pha- 
rao, and tell him that my brothers, my father's family who 

32 were in the land of Chanaan, are come to me ; but the men are 
shepherds ; for their occupation hath been to feed cattle, and 
they have brought their flocks and their herds and all that they 

33 have. If therefore Pharao send for you and say to you, What 

34 is your occupation ? you will say, We thy servants are feeders 
of cattle from our youth even to this time, as well as our fa- 
thers ; that you may dwell in Geseru-Arabia. For every shep- 
herd is an abomination to the Egyptians. 

XLVII. So Joseph went and told Pharao saying, My father 
and my brothers with their flocks and their herds and all that 
belong to them are come from the land of Chanaan ; and lo ! 

2 they are in the land of Gesem. And he took of his brothers 

3 five men and presented them before Pharao. And Pharao said 
to Joseph's brothers, What is your occupation ? and they said 
to Pharao, Thy servants are shepherds, both we and our fa- 

4 thers. Moreover they said to Pharao, We are come to sojourn 
in this land, because there is no pasture for thy servants' cattle, 
for the famine hath been great in the land of Chanaan. Now 
therefore let us sojourn in the land of Gesem. And Pharao said 
to Joseph, Let them dwell in the land of Gesem ; and if thou 
knowest any men of ability among them, make them over- 
seers of my cattle. 

5 Now when Jacob and his sons came into Egypt to Joseph 
and Pharao king of Egypt heard of it he said to Joseph, Thy 

6 father and thy brothers are come to thee, behold the land of 
Egypt is before thee, settle thy father and thy brothers in the 

7 best of the land. And when Joseph introduced his father Ja- 
cob and presented him before Pharao and Jacob had blessed 

VOL. I. L 



Oh. XLVII. GENESIS. 

8 Pharao, Pharao said to Jacob, How many are the years of the 

9 days of thy life ? And Jacob said to Pharao, The days of the 
years of my life which I am now sojourning are a hundred and 
thirty years. Few and evil have been the days of the years of 
my life. They have not reached to the days of the years of the 

10 life of my fathers which they sojourned. And when Jacob had 

11 blessed Pharao he went out from him. And Joseph settled 
his father and his brothers and gave them a possession in the 
land of Egypt, in the best of the land of Ramesses, as Pharao 

12 had ordered. And Joseph supplied his. father and his brothers 
and all his father's household with a certain portion of corn for 
each person. 

13 Now there was no food in the land, for the famine pre- 
vailed exceedingly ; and both the land of Egypt and the land 

14 of Chanaan fainted by reason of the famine. And Joseph col- 
lected all the money which was found in the land of Egypt 
and in the land of Chanaan for the corn which they bought 

15 and which he dealt out to them. And Joseph brought all the 
money to Pharao's house. And when all the money was gone, 
out of the land of Egypt and out of the land of Chanaan, all 
the Egyptians came to Joseph and said, Give us bread. Must 

16 we die in thy presence because we have no money ? There- 
upon Joseph said to them, Briug your cattle, and I will give 

17 you bread for your cattle if your money be gone. So they 
brought their cattle to Joseph, and he gave them bread for their 
horses and for their flocks and for their herds and for their as- 
ses and supplied them with bread that year for all their cattle. 

18 When that year was ended they came to him the next year 
and said, Perhaps we may be rejected by our lord : for as our 
money is gone and our stock and cattle are transferred to thee 
our lord, there is indeed nothing left us in the presence of our 

19 lord, but our persons and our lands. That we therefore may 
not die in thy presence and the land become a waste, purchase 
us and our land for bread, and we with our lands will be ser- 
vants to Pharao. Give us seed that we may sow and live and 

20 not die. So the land will not become desolate. Upon this Jo- 
seph purchased all the land of the Egyptians for Pharao. For the 
Egyptians sold their land to Pharao, because the famine pre- 

21 vailed over them. Thus the land became Pharao's, and he re- 



Ck. XLVIII. GENESIS. 

duced the people to a state of vassalage from one border of 

22 Egypt to the other, save the land of the priests only. This 
Joseph did not buy ; because Pharao had assigned them a gra- 
tuitous portion, and they ate the portion which Pharao assign- 

23 ed them. Therefore they did not sell their land. Then Joseph 
said to all the Egyptians, Behold I have this day purchased 

24 you and your land for Pharao. Take seed and sow the land. 
And of the products thereof you shall give Pharao the fifth. 
And the other four parts shall be your own to sow the land, 

25 and to be food for you and all your families. And they said, 
Thou hast saved our lives. We have found favour in the sight 

26 of our lord, and we will be servants to Pharao. So Joseph en- 
joined upon them the giving a fifth to Pharao as a statute which 
continueth even to this day in all the land of Egypt, excepting 
only the land of the priests. That did not belong to Pharao. 

27 Thus Israel became sojourners in the land of Egypt in the 
district of Gesem, and they had possessions therein and in- 

28 creased and multiplied exceedingly. And Jacob lived in the 
land of Egypt seventeen years. And all the days of the years 
of his life were a hundred and forty seven years. 

29 Now when the time of Israel's death drew nigh he sent for 
his son Joseph and said to him, If I have found favour in thy 
sight, put thy hand under my thigh and thou shalt deal kindly 

30 and truly with me, that thou wilt not bury me in Egypt ; but 
let me sleep with my fathers. Therefore thou shalt carry me 

31 out of Egypt and bury me in their sepulchre. And he said I 
will do as thou hast said. And he said, Swear to me. So he 
swore to him. And Israel bowed down on the head of his staff. 

XLVIII. After this when it was told Joseph, Thy father is 
sick, he took his two sons Manasses and Ephraim and went to 

2 Jacob. And when they told Jacob saying, Behold thy son Jo- 
seph is coming to thee, Israel strengthened himself and sat 

3 upon the bed. And Jacob said to Joseph, My God appeared 
to me at Louza in the land of Chanaan and blessed me and 

4 said, Behold I will make thee fruitful and multiply thee and 
make thee a multitude of nations, and I will give thee this land 

5 even to thy seed after thee for a perpetual possession. Now 
therefore thy two sons, who have been bom to thee in the land 
of Egypt, before I came to thee into Egypt, are mine. Ephraim 



!-!-! XLVIII. GENESIS. 

6 and Manasses, like Reuben and Symeon, shall be mine. And 
the issue which thou niayst have after this shall go by the 
name of their brothers. They shall be enrolled in their inhe- 

7 ritances. Now when I came out of Syrian Mesopotamia Rachel 
thy mother died in the land of Chanaan, just as I drew near 
the race ground of Chabratha on the way to Ephratha. So I 
buried her in the way of the race ground the same is Bethle- 

8 hem. Then Israel seeing the sons of Joseph said, Who are 

9 these with thee ? And Joseph said to his father, They are my 

10 sons, whom God hath given me here. Whereupon Jacob said, 
Bring them near to me that I may bless them. Now Israel's 
eyes were dim by reason of old age and he could not see clearly. 
And when he brought them near to him, he kissed them and 

1 1 embraced them. And Israel said to Joseph, Lo ! was I not de- 
prived of thy presence ? yet behold God hath shewn me even 

12 thy seed. Then Joseph took them from his knees; and when 

13 they had made obeisance to him with their face to the ground, 
Joseph taking his two sons, Ephraim in his right hand towards 
Israel's left and Manasses in his left hand towards Israel's right, 

14 brought them near to him. But Israel stretching out his right 
hand laid it on Ephraim's head (now he was the youngest) and 

15 his left hand on Manasses' head crossing his hands. And he 
blessed them and said, The God whom my fathers Abraham 
and Isaak worshipped — the God who hath fed me from my 

16 youth to this day — the Angel who delivered me from all evils, 
bless these children ! And let them be called by my name and 
by the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaak ; and may they 
be increased to a great multitude on the earth ! 

17 Now when Joseph saw that his father put his right hand on 
Ephraim's head, it appeared amiss to him ; and he took hold 
of his father's hand to remove it from Ephraim's head to the 

18 head of Manasses. And Joseph said to his father, Not so, my 
father : for this is the first born, put thy right hand on his head. 

19 But he refused and said, I know ; my son ; I know. This in- 
deed will be a people and will be exalted. But his younger bro- 
ther will be greater than he ; and his seed will be a multitude of 

20 nations. And he blessed them that day and said, By you Israel 
will bless saying, God make thee like Ephraim and Manasses. 

21 So he put Ephraim before Manasses. Then Israel said to Jo- 



!-!-! XLIX. GENESIS. 

seph, Lo I die. But God will be with you and bring you back 
'I'l to the land of your fathers. Now to thee exclusively above thy 
brothers, I give Sikima, which I took out of the hand of the 
Amorites with my sword and with my bow. 
XLTX. Then Jacob called his sons and said to them, Assem- 
ble that I may tell you what will happen to you in the latter 
days. 

2 Assemble and hear me, ye sons of Jacob : 
Hearken to Israel ; hearken to your father. 

3 Eeuben my first born ! 

Thou my strength and the head of my children ! 

4 Too imperious and too self sufficient ! 
In the excess of thy insolence, 

Thou shouldst not have burst forth like water. 

For thou wentest up to thy father's bed, 

Then thou pollutedst the couch to which thou wentest up. 

5 Symeon and Levi are brothers. 

They accomplished their iniquitous purpose. 

6 my soul, come not into their council ; 

And in their conspiracy let not my passions be engaged. 
Because in their wrath they slew men, 
And in their rage ham-strung a bull ; 

7 Cursed be their wrath, for it was headstrong ; 
And their enmity, for it was bitter. 

I will parcel them out in Jacob 
And scatter them among Israel. 

8 Judas ! Let thy brethren praise thee : 

Thy hands will be on the back of thy enemies. 
The sons of thy father shall bow down to thee. 

9 Judas is a lion's whelp. 

From a vigorous stem, my son, thou art sprung. 
Couching down thou art gone to sleep 
Like a young lion : Who dare rouse him ! 

10 A chief shall not fail from Judas. 
Nor a leader from his loins ; 

Till the things reserved for him shall come — 
Even He, the expectation of nations. 

11 Binding his colt to a vine 

And his asses colt to the young vine, 



!-!-! XLIX. GENESIS. 

He will wash his robe in wine, 

And his mantle in the blood of the grape. 

12 His eyes are more exhilarating than wine, 
And his teeth are whiter than milk. 

13 Zabulon shall dwell by the sea ; 

And he will be near the haven of ships, 
And will extend as far as Sidon. 
1-1 Issachar desired earnestly what was good, 

Halting between two choices. 

15 But seeing the resting place, that it was good, 
And the land, that it was fertile, 

He bowed his shoulder to labour 
And became a husbandman. 

16 Dan will judge his people 
And be like a tribe in Israel. 

17 Let Dan be indeed a serpent in the way, 
Lying in watch in a path, 

Biting the horse's heel, 

That the horseman may fall backwards ; 

18 Waiting continually the salvation of the Lord. 

19 Gad : Troops of plunderers will plunder him ; 
And he to his utmost, will plunder them. 

20 Aser. His meat will be fat 

And he will furnish dainties for princes. 

21 Nephthaleim is a spreading stock, 
Super-adding beauty by its product. 

22 Joseph is a fruitful son. 
My fruitful son was envied. 
Abide with me, my younger son, 

Against whom calumniators brought false accusations. 

23 Though the masters of bows took aim at him ; 
Yet their bows and their strength were broken, 
And the sinewy arms of their hands enfeebled 
By the hand of the mighty One of Jacob. 

24 Thence he who hath strengthened Israel 
Is from the God of thy father ; 

25 And My God hath helped thee ; and blessed thee 
With the blessing of heaven from above, 

And with the blessing of a land having all thiDgs, 



Oh. L. GENESIS. 

By reason of the blessing of breasts and womb, 

26 He hath made the blessings of thy father and mother, 
More durable than the blessings of perpetual mountains, 
And more permanent than the blessings of everlasting hills. 
They shall be on the head of Joseph 

And on the crown of the head of brothers 
Of whom he was the leader. 

27 Benjamin is a ravening wolf. 

In the morning he is still eating, 

And for the evening he provideth food. 

28 All these were the twelve sons of Jacob. And these were 
the words which their father spoke to them when he blessed 

29 them, each according to his peculiar blessing. And when he 
had blessed them he said, I am going to be added to my peo- 

30 pie, and you shall bury me with my fathers, in the cave which 
is in the field of Ephron the Chettite, in the double cave which 
is over against Mambre in the land of Chanaan — the cave 

31 which Abraham bought of Ephron the Chettite for the posses- 
sion of a burying place. There they buried Abraham and Sa- 

32 rah his wife. There they buried Isaak and Kebekka his wife. 
There Leia was buried — in the field namely in the cave in it, 

33 which was purchased of the children of Chet. And when Ja- 
cob had finished this charge to his sons he drew up his feet into 
the bed and gave up the ghost and was added to his people. 

L. Then Joseph fell upon his father's face and bewailed him 

2 and kissed him. And Joseph gave orders to his servants the 

3 embalmers to embalm his father. And when the embalmers 
had embalmed Israel, and compleated his forty days ; (for this 
is the time allowed for embalming) the Egyptians mourned 

4 for him seventy days. And when the days of mourning were 
over, Joseph spoke to the princes of Pharao saying, If I have 
found favour in your sight, speak for me to Pharao and say, 

5 My father adjured me saying, In the tomb which I cut out for 
myself in the land of Chanaan there thou shalt bury me. Now 
therefore let me go up and bury my father and I will return 

6 again. And Pharao said to Joseph, Co up and bury thy father 

7 as he adjured thee. So Joseph went up to bury his father. And 
there went up with him all the servants of Pharao and the elders 
of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt, and all 



Cli. L. GENESIS. 

Joseph's family and his brothers and all his lather's household 

8 and his kindred. But their flocks and herds they left in the 

9 land of Gesem. There went up also with him chariots and 

10 horsemen, so that the camp was very large. And when they 
came to the threshing floor of Atacl, which is on the bank 
of the Jordan, they mourned for him with a very great and 
sore lamentation. And he continued the mourning for his father 

11 seven days. And when the inhabitants of the land of Chanaan 
saw the mourning at the threshing floor of Atad, they said, 
This is a great grief to the Egyptians. For this cause they call- 
ed its name Grief of Egypt. It is on the bank of the Jordan. 

12 When his sons had done this for him — when they had car- 
ried him to the land of Chanaan and buried him in the double 

13 cave — the cave which Abraham bought for the possession of a 

14 burying place from Ephron the Chettite over against Mambre, 
then Joseph returned to Egypt, he and his brethren and those 
who went up with him to bury his father. 

15 Now when Joseph's brothers saw that their father was dead, 
they said, Perhaps Joseph may bear us a grudge and requite 

16 us for all the ills which we have done to him. So they came to 
Joseph and said, Our father before he died adjured us saying, 

17 Thus shall you say to Joseph, Forgive them their iniquity and 
their sin for having done thee evil. Now therefore forgive the 

18 iniquity of the servants of the God of thy father. And while 
they were speaking to him, Joseph wept. And they came near 
to him and said, We are thy servants, upon which Joseph said 

19 to them, Fear not, for I am God's servant. You indeed con- 

20 suited against me for evil : but God determined concerning 
me for good, to bring to pass as at this day, that much people 

21 might be nourished. Moreover he said to them, Be not afraid. 
I will continue to nourish you and your families. So he com- 

22 forted them, and spoke affectionately to them, xind Joseph 
dwelt in Egypt, he and his brothers and all his father's family. 

23 And when Joseph had lived a hundred and ten years and saw 
Ephraim's children to the third generation ; and the children 
of Machir the son of Manasses were also dandled on his knees ; 

24 Joseph spoke to his brothers, saying, I die, but God will 
assuredly visit you and conduct you out of this land into the 
land which God with an oath gave to our fathers, Abraham, 



!-!-! L. GENESIS. 

25 Isaak and Jacob. And Joseph adjured the children of Israel 
saying, In the visitation wherewith G-od will visit you, you shall 

26 carry my bones hence with you. So Joseph died being a hun- 
dred and ten years old, and when they had embalmed him they 
put him into a coffin in Egypt. 

EXODUS. 

I. These are the names of Israel's sons who went down to 

Egypt with their father Jacob. They went every one with his 
whole family ; Reuben, Symeon, Levi, Judas, Issachar, Zabu- 

5 Ion, Benjamin, Dan and Nephthaleim, Gad and Aser. Now 
Joseph was in Egypt. And all the souls from Jacob were seven- 

6 ty five. And when Joseph was dead and all his brothers and all 

7 that generation and the children of Israel had increased and 
multiplied and were become numerous and grew more and 

8 more powerful and the land caused them to abound, there 

9 arose another king over Egypt, who knew not Joseph. And he 
said to his nation, Behold the race of the children of Israel is 

10 become a great multitude, and is mightier than we. Come 
therefore, let us deal subtilly with them. Perhaps when they 
are multiplied, if a war should happen to us, they will join 
our enemies and fight against us and depart out of the land. 

11 So he set task masters over them to afflict them with labours and 
they built for Pharao fortified cities, namely, Peitho and Rames- 

12 ses and On, which is Heliopolis. But the more they afflicted them, 
the more they multiplied and grew stronger and stronger. So 

13 the Egyptians were abhorred by the children of Israel; and 
the Egyptians ruled over the Israelites with rigour and made 
their lives bitter with hard labour in working clay and making 

14 bricks and with all the toils of the field, according to the seve- 
ral kinds of service to which they forcibly subjected them. 

15 Moreover the king of the Egyptians spoke to the Hebrew 
midwives, of whom the name of the first in rank was Sep- 

16 phora and the name of the second Phua, and said, When you 
do the office of midwives to the Hebrew women and they are 
delivered, if it be a male child, kill it ; but if it be a female pre- 

17 serve it alive. But the midwives feared God and did not do as 
the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the males. 

VOL. i. M 



Oh. EI. EXODUS. 

IS Whereupon the king of Egypt sent for the midwives and said 
to them, AVhy have you done this and saved the male chil- 

19 dren ? And the midwives said to Pharao, The Hebrew women 
are not like the Egyptian ; for they bring forth instantly. Be- 

20 fore the midwives can come to them, they are delivered. And 
God dealt well with the midwives, and the people multiplied 

21 and grew mighty. And because the midwives feared God they 

22 established families for themselves. Then Pharao gave orders 
to all his people saying, Every male child which is born to the 
Hebrews you shall throw into the river, but preserve every fe- 
male alive. 

II. Now there was a certain man of the tribe of Levi who had 
married one of the daughters of Levi and she conceived and 

2 bore a son. And when they saw that he was a beautiful child 

3 they hid him three months. But when they could not conceal 
him any longer, his mother provided for him a wicker basket 
and plaistered it with bitumenous pitch and put the child into 
it and placed it in the stagnant water by the side of the river. 

4 And his sister watched it at a distance to see what would be- 

5 come of it. And the daughter of Pharao came to bathe her- 
self at the river and her maids were walking with her along the 
bank. And seeing the basket in the stagnant water she sent 

6 her maid and had it brought to her. And upon opening it she 
saw in the basket a child weeping. And the daughter of Pha- 
rao had compassion on it and said, This is one of the Hebrew 

7 children. Whereupon his sister said to Pharao's daughter, 
Shall I call for thee a nurse from among the Hebrews to suckle 
the child for thee ? And the daughter of Pharao said, Go. 

8 Upon which the girl went and called the child's mother. And 

9 the daughter of Pharao said to her, Take care of this child for 

10 me and suckle it for me ; and I will pay thee the wages. So the 
woman took the child and suckled it ; and when the boy was 
grown up she brought him to Pharao's daughter and he be- 
came her son. And she called his name Moses, saying, I drew 
him out of the water. 

11 And after a course of many years, when Moses was become 
great he went out to his brethren the children of Israel. And as 
he was observing their distress, he saw an Egyptian beating a 
Hebrew, who was one of his brethren the children of Israel. 



!-!-! III. EXODUS. 

12 Whereupon looking about on every side and seeing no body 

13 he smote the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. And going 
out the next day he saw two Hebrew men quarrelling and said 

14 to him who was in the wrong, Why dost thou beat thy neigh- 
bour ? To which he replied, Who made thee a ruler or a judge 
over us ? Dost thou mean to kill me, as thou didst the Egyptian 
yesterday ? Thereupon Moses was alarmed and said, Is the 
thing become so public ? 

15 Now when Pharao heard of this deed he sought to slay 
Moses, but he withdrew from the presence of Pharao and took 

1G up his abode in the land of Madiam. When he came to the 
land of Madiam he sat down by a well. Now the priest of Ma- 
diam had seven daughters who tended the flocks of their fa- 
ther Jothor. And they having come to the well began to 
draw water to fill the troughs that they might water the flocks 
of their father Jothor, and the shepherds came and drove them 

17 away. Upon which Moses arose and protected them and drew 

18 water for them and watered their flocks. And when they came 
to their father Eaguel, he said to them, Why have you come 

19 so soon to-day ? To which they replied, An Egyptian protect- 
ed us from the shepherds and drew for us and watered our 

20 flocks. And he said to his daughters, And where is he ? Why 
did you leave the man behiud ? Therefore call him that he may 

21 eat bread. So Moses dwelt with the man; and he gave him 

22 his daughter Sepphora to be his wife. And his wife conceived 
and bore him a son ; And Moses called his name Gersam, say- 
ing, Because I am a sojourner in a strange land. 

2o And after those many years the king of Egypt died and the 
Israelites groaned under their labours and raised a loud out- 
cry ; and their cry on account of their labours ascended up to 

24 God. And God heard their groans. And God remembered 
his covenant which he had made with Abraham, Isaak and 
Jacob. And God looked upon the Israelites and was made 
known to them. 

III. Now when Moses was feeding the flocks of Jothor his 

father in law the priest of Madiam he led them below the wil- 

2 derness and came to the mountain Choreb. And an Angel of 

the Lord appeared to him in a fire blazing out of a bush. And 

when he saw that the bush blazed with fire, but was not con- 



!-!-! III. EXODUS. 

3 sinned, Moses said, I will go near aiid see this great sight ; 

4 why the bush is not consumed. But when the Lord saw that 
he drew near to look ; the Lord called to him out of the bush 
saying, Moses ! Moses ! And he said, What is it ? And he 

5 said, Approach not hither. Loose the sandals from thy feet ; 

6 for the place where thou standest is holy ground. Then he 
said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, and 

7 the God of Isaak, and the God of Jacob. Whereupon Moses 
turned away his face ; for he was afraid to look forward in the 
presence of God. And the Lord said to Moses, I have indeed 
seen the affliction of my people in Egypt and have heard their 

8 cry on the account of their task masters ; for I know their sorrow, 
therefore I am come dow r n to deliver them out of the hand of 
the Egyptians and to bring them out of that land, and conduct 
them to a land good and spacious — to a land flowing with milk 
and honey — to the country of the Chananites and the Chettites 
and the Amorites, and the Pherezites, and the Gergasites and 

9 the Evites and the Jebusites. And now behold the cry of the 
children of Israel hath reached me and I have seen the oppres- 
sion with which the Egyptians oppress them, now therefore 

10 come : I will send thee to Pharao king of Egypt and thou shalt 

11 bring my people the Israelites out of the land of Egypt. There- 
upon Moses said to God, Who am I that I should go to Pharao 
king of Egypt, and that I should bring the Israelites out of the 

12 land of Egypt? Upon which God spoke to Moses saying, 
That I will be with thee, even this is the sign for thee. And 
because I will send thee, therefore when thou hast brought my 
people out of Egypt you shall worship God on this mountain. 

13 Then Moses said to God, Behold when I come to the Israel- 
ites and say to them, The God of our fathers hath sent me 
to you ; and they shall say, What is his name ? What shall I 

14 say to them ? On which God spoke to Moses saying, I am The 
I Am. Moreover he said, Thus shalt thou say to the children 

15 of Israel, The I Am hath sent me to you. Again God said to 
Moses, Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel, The Lord, 
the God of our fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of 
Isaak, and the God of Jacob hath sent me to you. This is my 

16 everlasting name and memorial to all generations. Go there- 
fore and assemble the Senate of the children of Israel and say 



Oh. IV. EXODUS. 

to them, The Lord, the (rod of our fathers hath appeared to 
rne, even the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaak, and the 
God of Jacob saying, With watchfulness I have observed you 

17 and all that hath befallen you in Egypt. Moreover he said, 1 
will bring you up from the oppression of the Egyptians to the 
land of the Chananites and the Chettites and the Amorites and 
the Pherezites, and the Gergasites and the Evites and the Je- 
busites — to a land flowing with milk and honey, and they will 

18 hearken to thy voice, and thou and the Senate of Israel shall 
go to Pharao king of Egypt, and thou shalt say to him, The 
God of the Hebrews hath called us'; let us therefore go three 
days' journey into the wilderness that we may sacrifice to our 

1!) God. But I know that Pharao king of Egypt will not suffer 

20 you to go, but by a strong hand. Therefore I will stretch forth 
my hand and smite the Egyptians with all my wonders which 
I will do anions them. And after these he will dismiss you. 

21 And I will give the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, 
so that when you go, you shall not go away empty ; but every 

22 woman shall ask of her neighbour and of him who sojourneth 
in her house vessels of silver and of gold, and raiment which 
you shall put on your sons and your daughters and you shall 

IV. spoil the Egyptians. Then Moses answered and said, If 
they will not believe and hearken to my voice — for they may 
say, God hath not appeared to thee : What shall I say to them ? 

2 And the Lord said to him, What is that in thy hand ? And he 

3 said a staff. Then he said, Cast it on the ground. So he cast it 
on the ground and it became a serpent : and 3 loses fled from 

4 it. Then the Lord said to Moses, Stretch forth thy hand and 
take it by the tail. So he stretched forth his hand and caught it 

5 by the tail ; and it was in his hand a staff. That they may be- 
lieve thee that the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and 
the God of Isaak, and the God of Jacob hath appeared to thee, 

6 said the Lord again, Put thy hand in thy bosom. So he put his 
hand in his bosom ; and when he drew his hand out of his bo- 

7 som, his hand was like snow. Then the Lord said to him again, 
Put thy hand in thy bosom. So he put his hand in his bosom, 
and when he drew it out of his bosom, it was again restored 

8 to the colour of its ilesh. Now if they will not believe 
thee nor hearken to the voice of the first sign, they will be- 



!-!-! IV. EXODUS. 

9 lieve thee at the voice of the second sign. But if they will 
not believe thee for these two signs, nor hearken to thy voice, 
thou shalt take some of the water of the river and pour it 
out on the dry ground ; and the water which thou shalt take 

10 from the river shall be blood on the ground. Then Moses 
said to the Lord, Lord, I am not sufficiently qualified, 
neither heretofore nor since thou hast begun to speak to thy 
servant. I have a stammering voice and a faltering tongue. 

11 Upon which the Lord said to Moses, Who gave man a 
mouth? and who made the hard of hearing and the deaf — 

12 him who seeth and the blind ? Was it not I who am God ? Now 
therefore go and I will open thy mouth and teach thee what 

13 thou shalt say. Then Moses said, Lord, provide another 

14 capable person whom thou wilt send. Whereupon the anger of 
the Lord was kindled against Moses and he said, Lo ! is not 
Aaron the Levite thy brother ? I know that he can speak well 
for thee. And lo ! he will come out to meet thee, and when 

15 he shall see thee he will be rejoiced. Thou therefore shalt 
speak to him and commit my words to his mouth. And I will 
open thy mouth and his mouth and teach you what you shall 

1G do. He shall speak to the people for thee and he shall be thy 

17 mouth and thou shalt be to him as the Oracle of God. And 
this staff which was turned into a serpent thou shalt take in thy 
hand. With it thou shalt perform miracles. 

18 Then Moses went and returned to Jothor his father in law 
and said, I must go and return to my brethren who are in 

19 Egypt and see if they be still living. And Jothor said to Mo- 
ses, Go in peace. So after many years, when the king of Egypt 
was dead, and the Lord said to Moses in Madiam, Go return 

20 to Egypt, for all who sought thy life are dead; Moses took 
his wife and children and mounted them on asses to return 
to Egypt. And he took in his hand the staff which he had 

21 from God. And the Lord said to Moses, Thou art on thy 
way and returning to Egypt. See that thou do in the sight of 
Pharao all the miracles which I put in thy hands. And I will 
make his heart stubborn, so that he will not let the people go. 

22 And thou shalt say to Pharao, Thus saith the Lord, Israel is 

23 my first born son, and I have said to thee, Send away this my 
people that they may serve me ; if therefore thou wilt not dis- 
miss them behold I will slay thy son — thy first born. 



!-!-! V. EXODUS. 

24 Now when he was on the way at the resting place, an 

25 Angel of the Lord met him and sought to kill him. Where- 
upon Sepphora took a sharp stone and circumcised her son. 
Then she fell at his feet and said, The blood of the circumci- 

26. sion of my son hath stopped me. So she departed from him> 
because she said, The blood of the circumcision of my son 
hath stopt me. 

27 Now the Lord had said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness 
to meet Moses. So he went and met him at the mount of God ; 

28 and they saluted each other. And Moses told Aaron all the 
words of the Lord, which he had sent and all the orders which 

29 he had given him in charge. And Moses and Aaron went and 

30 assembled the Senate of the Israelites, and Aaron rehearsed 
all the words which God had spoken to Moses ; and he per- 

31 formed the miracles in the presence of the people. And the 
people believed and were rejoiced that God had visited the 
children of Israel and that he had seen their affliction. So 
bowing their heads the people worshipped. 

V. And after this Moses went in with Aaron to Pharao and 
they said to him, Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, Let 
my people go that they may keep a festival for me in the wil- 

2 derness. Upon which Pharao said, Who is he, that I should 

3 hearken to his voice so as to send away the Israelites ? I do 
not know the Lord, nor will I let Israel go. Then they said 
to him, The God of the Hebrews hath called us. Let us 
therefore go three days' journey into the wilderness that we 
may sacrifice to the Lord our God, lest death or destruction 

4 befal us. Thereupon the king of Egypt said to them, Why 
do ye, Moses and Aaron, divert the people from their labours ? 

5 Begone each of you to his work. And Pharao said, Behold 
this people is now numerous, therefore we must not let them 

6 rest from their labours. So Pharao gave orders to the task 

7 masters of the people and to the clerks saying, You shall no 
more give the people straw to make bricks as heretofore; but 
let them go and gather straw for themselves ; yet the daily 

8 task of brick making which they now perform, you shall lay 
upon them. Thou shalt make no abatement ; for they are idle. 
Therefore they have cried saying, Let us go and sacrifice to 

9 our God. Let the work of these men be made heavy and let 



Oh. VI. EXODUS. 

them employ their thoughts about that, and not trouble them- 

10 selves with vain discourses. Upon this the task masters and 

11 clerks hurried them and spoke to the people saying, Thus saith 
Pharao, I will no more give you straw ; go and collect straw for 
yourselves where you can find it; for no abatement shall be 

12 made of your task. So the people were dispersed through all 

13 the land of Egypt to collect stubble instead of straw. And the 
task masters urged them saying, Compleat the customary daily 

14 task as when straw was furnished you. And when they beat 
the clerks of the nation of the Israelites who were set over them 
by the officers of Pharao and said, Why have you not as hereto- 

15 fore compleated your tasks of brick making to day? the clerks of 
the children of Israel went and cried to Pharao saying, Why dost 

16 thou deal thus with thy servants ? There is no straw given to 
thy servants, yet they say to us, Make bricks. And lo ! thy 
servants are beaten. Wilt thou then deal unjustly with thy 

17 people ? But he said to them, You are idle : You are idlers. 

18 Therefore you say, Let us go and sacrifice to our God. Go 
therefore now and work ; for there shall be no straw given 

19 you, yet you shall deliver the task of bricks. So the clerks of 
the children of Israel saw themselves in a miserable situation, 
when they said, You shall be allowed no abatement from the 

20 customary daily task of brick making. And upon meeting 
Moses and Aaron who had come to meet them as they came 

21 out from Pharao they said to them, God look upon you and 
judge. Eor you have made the smell of us horrible before Pha- 
rao and before his servants to put a sword in his hand to 

22 kill us. Thereupon Moses turned to the Lord and said, 
Lord, why hast thou afflicted this people ? And why hast thou 
sent me ? For since I went to Pharao to speak in thy name, 
he hath ill treated this peoj>le and thou hast not delivered thy 

VI. people. Then the Lord said to Moses, Now thou shalt see 
what I will do to Pharao ; for by a strong hand he shall let them 
go ; and by an uplifted arm he shall drive them out of his land. 

2 Moreover God spake to Moses and said to him, I am the Lord ; 

3 and I appeared to Abraham and to Isaak and to Jacob as their 
God. Though I did not clearly manifest to them my name 

4 Lord, yet I established this my covenant with them to give 
them the land of the Chananites — the land wherein they had 



!-!-! VI. EXODUS. 

5 sojourned — in which they were then sojourning. Now I have 
heard the groaning of the children of Israel, which the Egyp- 

6 tians have occasioned by enslaving them. And I have remem- 
bered the covenant with you. Go speak to the children of Is- 
rael and say, I am the Lord and I will bring you out from the 
bondage of the Egyptians, and deliver you from this slavery, and 
redeem you with an uplifted arm and with great decision and 
take you to myself for my own people, and I will be your God. 

7 And you shall know that I the Lord am your God, who brought 

8 you out from the tyranny of the Egyptians. And I will bring 
you to the land for which I stretched out my hand to give it 
to Abraham and Isaak and Jacob. And I will give it to you 
for a heritage. I am the Lord. 

9 In these terms Moses spoke to the Israelites ; but they heark- 
ened not to him on account of their despondency, and on ac- 

10 count of their hard labours. Then the Lord spoke to Moses 

11 saying ; Go in ; speak to Pharao king of Egypt that he may 

12 send the children of Israel out of his land. Upon which Mo- 
ses spoke before the Lord saying, Behold the Israelites have 
not hearkened to me, how then should Pharao hearken to me, 
incapable as I am of speaking ? 

13 (Now when the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave 
them a charge to Pharao king of Egypt to send away the Is- 
raelites out of the land of Egypt, these were the chief lead- 

14 ers of their patriarchal houses. The sons of Eeuben the first 
born of Israel, Enoch and Phallus, Asron and Carmi. This 

15 was the family of Reuben. And the sons of Symeon were 
Jemuel and Jamin and Aocl and Jachin and Saar and Saul the 

16 son of a Chananitish woman. These were the patriarchal 
houses of the Symeonites. And these are the names of the 
children of Levi according to their families, Gerson, Kaath 
and Merari. Now the years of the life of Levi were a hun- 

17 dred and thirty seven. And these were the sons of Gerson, 
Lobeni and Semei. These were houses of their patriarchal 

18 family. And the sons of Kaath were Ambram and Issaar, Che- 
bron and Oziel. Now the years of the life of Kaath were a 

19 hundred and thirty three. And the sons of Merari were Mooli 
and Mousi. These were the houses of the patriarchal family of 

20 Levi according to their families. Now Ambram had taken to 

VOL. I. N 



!-!-! VII. EXODUS. 

wife Jocliabed a daughter of his father's brother and she bore to 
him Aaron and Moses and Mariam their sister. And the years 

21 of the life of Ambrani were a hundred and thirty two. And 

22 the sons of Issaar were Kore and Naphek and Zechri. And 

23 the sons of Oziel were Misael and Elisaphan and Segri. And 
Aaron had taken to wife Elizabeth the daughter of Aminadab 
and the sister of Naason, and she bore to him Nadab and 

24 Abiud and Eleazar and Ithamar. And the sons of Kore were 
Asir and Elkana and Abiasar. These were the families of 

25 Kore. And Eleazar the son of Aaron had taken to wife one 
of the daughters of Phoutiel, and she bore to him Phineas. 
These were the heads of the patriarchal family of the Levites 

26 according to their genealogies. This Aaron and Moses were 
they whom God ordered to lead the Israelites out of the land 
of Egypt with their armies. These were they who spoke to 

27 Pharao king of Egypt, xlnd the same Aaron and Moses led 
the Israelites out of Egypt. 

28 Now on the day when the Lord spoke to Moses in the 
land of Egypt, when the Lord spoke to Moses and said, I 
am the Lord, Speak to Pharao king of Egypt all the words 
which I say to thee, and Moses said before the Lord, Be- 
hold I am a stammerer and how will Pharao listen to me, the 

VII. Lord spoke to Moses saying, Behold I have made thee 
a god to Pharao, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet, 

2 and thou shalt deliver to him all that I command thee. And 
Aaron thy brother shall speak to Pharao, to send the Israelites 

3 out of his land. But I will let Pharao's heart be stubborn, and 
I will multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt. 

4 And when Pharao will not hearken to you, I will lay my hand 
upon Egypt and bring out my people, the children of Israel 
with my host out of the land of Egypt with great vengeance. 

5 And all the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord when I 
lay my hand on Egypt and bring the children of Israel out 

6 from among them. So Moses acted in conjunction with Aaron ; 

7 and as the Lord commanded so they did. Now Moses was 

8 eighty years old and his brother Aaron was eighty three years 
old, when he spoke to Pharao.) 

9 And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron saying, If Pha- 
rao shall speak to you and say, Give us a sign or a miracle, 



Oh. VII. EXODUS. 

then thou shalt say to thy brother Aaron, Take this staff and 
throw it on the ground in the presence of Pharao and before 

10 his attendants and it shall be a dragon. So Moses went in with 
Aaron before Pharao and his attendants and they did as the 
Lord commanded them. But when Aaron threw down the staff 
before Pharao and before his attendants and it became a dra- 
gon, Pharao called together the wise men of Egypt and the 

11 sorcerers. And the Egyptian enchanters by their sorceries did 
in like manner. They cast down each his staff, which became 

12 dragons. Though Aaron's staff devoured their staves, yet Pha- 

13 rao's heart was stubborn and he hearkened not to them to do 
as the Lord cooimanded them. 

11 Then the Lord said to Moses, Pharao's heart is obstinate- 
ly bent not to let the people go. Go in the morning to Pharao. 

15 Behold he is going out to the water and thou wilt meet him at 
the border of the river. And thou shalt take in thy hand the 

16 staff which was turned into a serpent, and say to him, The 
Lord the God of the Hebrews hath sent to thee saying, Send 
away my people that they may serve me in the wilderness, and 

17 behold thou hast not hearkened hitherto. Thus saith the Lord, 
By this thou shalt know that I am the Lord, Behold with this staff 
which is in my hand I smite upon the water in the river 

18 and it shall turn into blood. And the fishes which are in the 
river shall die. And the river shall stink. And the Egyptians 

19 shall not be able to drink the water of the river. Moreover the 
Lord said to Moses, Say to thy brother Aaron, Take thy staff 
in thy hand and stretch forth thy hand against the waters of 
Egypt, against the rivers and against the canals and against 
their ponds and against all their reservoirs of water ; and they 
shall become blood, and there shall be blood throughout all 
the land of Egypt both in the cisterns of wood and in those 
of stone. 

20 So Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded them. 
And lifting up his staff he smote the water in the river in the 
presence of Pharao and before all his attendants and changed 
all the water of the river into blood. And the fishes which were 

21 in the river died. And the river stunk so that the Egyptians 
could not drink the water of the river. And there was blood 

22 in all the land of Egypt. But when the magicians of Egypt 



!-!-! VIII. EXODUS. 

did in like manner by their enchantments, Pharao's heart be- 
came inflexible so that he hearkened not to them as the Lord 

23 had said. So Pharao returned and went to his house and paid 

24 no attention to this. And all the Egyptians dug round about 
the river for water to drink for they could not drink the water 
of the river. 

25 And when the seven days were fulfilled after the Lord had 
smitten the river, the Lord said to Moses, Go to Pharao and 

VIII. say to him, Thus saith the Lord, Send away my peo- 

2 pie that they may serve me. But if thou wilt not let them go, 
behold I will smite all thy borders with frogs and the river shall 

3 swarm with frogs. And they shall go up and come into thy 
houses and into thy bed chambers, even upon thy beds ; and 
into the houses of thy servants and thy people and into thy 

4 kneading troughs and thy ovens. Both against thee and against 
.*> thy attendants and thy people shall the frogs come up. And the 

Lord said to Moses, Say to Aaron thy brother, Stretch forth 
the staff with thy hand over the rivers and over the canals and 

6 over the lakes and bring up the frogs. So Aaron stretched 
forth his hand over the waters of Egypt and brought up the 
frogs. And frogs came up in abundance and covered the land 

7 -of Egypt. Though the Egyptian sorcerers did in like man- 
ner by their enchantments and brought up frogs on the land 

8 of Egypt ; yet Pharao called Moses and Aaron and said, Pray 
for me to the Lord, and let him take away the frogs from me 
and my people ; and I will let them go that they may sacrifice 

9 to the Lord. Whereupon Moses said to Pharao, Set me the 
time when I shall pray for thee and for thy attendants and thy 
people, that the frogs may vanish from thee and from thy peo- 

10 pie and out of your houses and be left only in the river. And 
he said against to-morrow. And Moses said, It shall be as thou 
hast spoken. That thou mayst know that there is no other 

11 besides the Lord ; the frogs shall be removed from thee and 
from your houses and from your villages and from all thy at- 
tendants and from thy people ; but in the river they shall be 

12 left. Then Moses and Aaron went out from Pharao ; and 
Moses cried to the Lord for the performance of the promise 

13 touching the frogs as Pharao had stated. And the Lord did 
as Moses said. The frogs died out of the houses and out of 



!-!-! VIII. EXODUS. 

14 the villages and out of the fields. And they collected them 
in heaps and the land stank. 

15 But when Pharao saw that there was a respite, his heart 
became stubborn and he hearkened not to them as the Lord 

16 had said. Then the Lord said to Moses, Say to Aaron, 
Stretch forth thy staff with thy hand and smite the dust of the 
ground, and there shall be stinging gnats among the men and 

17 the four footed beasts throughout all the land of Egypt. Ac- 
cordingly Aaron stretched forth the staff with his hand and 
smote the dust of the ground, and there were stinging gnats 
among the men and among the four footed beasts, and in all the 

18 dust of the ground there were gnats. As the magicians did 
in like manner by their enchantments to remove the stinging 
gnats but could not, so the stinging gnats were among the 

19 men and among the four footed beasts. Therefore the sorcer- 
ers said to Pharao, This is the finger of (rod. But Pharao's 
heart was inflexible and he hearkened not to them as the Lord 
had said. 

20 Then the Lord said to Moses, Bise early to-morrow and 
stand before Pharao. Lo ! he will come forth to the water, and 
thou shalt say to him, Thus saith the Lord, Send away my 

21 people that they may serve me in the wilderness. But if thou 
wilt not send away my people behold I will send against thee 
and against thy attendants and against thy people and against 
your houses, the dog fly. And the houses of the Egyptians 
shall be filled with dog flies throughout all the land in which 

22 they are. But in that day I will distinguish in a glorious manner 
the land of Gesem in which my people are. In it there shall 
be no dog flies, that thou mayst know that I am the Lord the 

23 God of the whole earth. And I will make a difference be- 
tween my people and thy people. To-morrow this shall be 

24 in the land. And the Lord did so. And there came a swarm 
of dog flies into the houses of Pharao and into the houses of 
his attendants and into all the land of Egypt : and the land 

25 was utterly wasted by them. Whereupon Pharao sent for 
Moses and Aaron and said, Go and sacrifice to the Lord your 

26 God in this land. And Moses said, It is not possible to do so. 
For we shall sacrifice to the Lord our God the abominations 
of the Egyptians. Now if we should sacrifice the abomina- 



!-!-! IX. EXODUS. 

tions of the Egyptians before their faces we shall be stoned. 

27 We will go three days' journey into the wilderness and sacri- 

28 flee to our God, as the Lord hath commanded us. Then Pha- 
rao said, I give you leave to go, that you may sacrifice to 
your God in the wilderness ; but you must not extend your 
journey to a great distance. Therefore pray to the Lord 

29 for me. And Moses said I will go out from thee and pray 
to God; and the dog flies shall depart from thy servants 
and from thy people to-morrow. But let not Pharao deal 
deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacri- 

30 flee to the Lord. So Moses went out from Pharao and prayed 

31 to God. And the Lord did as Moses said and removed the 
dog flies from Pharao and his attendants and his people and 

32 there was not one left. But Pharao emboldened his heart at 
this time also and would not let the people go. 

IX. Then the Lord said to Moses, Go to Pharao and say to 
him, Thus saith the Lord the God of the Hebrews, Send away 

2 my people that they may serve me. For if thou wilt not send 

3 away my people but still detain them, behold the hand of the 
Lord will be upon thy cattle in the field : and among the 
horses and among the asses and the camels and the herds and 

•i the flocks there shall be a grievous pestilence. And at this time 
also I will make a remarkable distinction between the cattle of 
the Egyptians and the cattle of the Israelites. Among the 

5 aforementioned belonging to Israel not one shall die. And 
God fixed a set time saying, To-morrow the Lord will do this 

6 in the land. So on the morrow the Lord executed this, and all 
the cattle which died belonged to the Egyptians; but of the 

7 cattle belonging to the Israelites not one died. But though 
Pharao saw that of all the cattle belonging to the Israelites not 
one died, his heart was inflexible and he would not let the 
people go. 

8 Then the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron saying, Take 
handfuls of ashes from the furnace ; and let Moses scatter them 
towards heaven in the presence of Pharao and before his at- 

9 tendants and let there be dust on all the land of Egypt, and 
there shall be on men and four footed beasts an inflammation ; 
blains oozing forth both on man and beast in all the land of 

10 Egypt. So Moses took the ashes of a furnace in the sight of 



!-!-! IX. EXODUS. 

Pharao and scattered them towards heaven, and there was an 

11 inflammation with oozing blains both on man and beast, so 
that the sorcerers could not stand before Mioses, because of 
these boils. For the boils were on the sorcerers and throusrh- 

12 out all the land of Egypt. But the Lord made Pharao's heart 
stubborn and he hearkened not to them as the Lord com- 
manded. 

13 Then the Lord said to Moses, Rise early to-morrow morn- 
ing and stand before Pharao and say to him, Thus saith the 
Lord the God of the Hebrews, Send away my people that they 

14 may serve me. For at this time I am going to send all my 
plagues into thy heart and the heart of thy servants and thy 
people, that thou mayst know that there is none like me in all 

15 the earth. I might now indeed have stretched forth my hand 
and smitten thee and destroyed thy people with pestilence, so 

16 that thou shouldst have been blotted out from the earth : but 
thou hast been preserved for this purpose that by thee I might 
display my power and that my name may be celebrated 

17 throughout all the earth. Shouldst thou therefore still deter- 

18 mine with respect to my people not to let them go, behold at 
this time to-morrow I will pour down a great storm of hail — 
such as hath never been in Egypt, from the day it was created 

19 even to this day. Now therefore haste and gather in thy cattle 
and whatever thou hast in the field. For every man and beast, 
which shall be found in the fields and shall not have come 
home, on them the hail shall fall and they shall die. 

20 Such of the attendants of Pharao as feared the Lord gather- 

21 ed their cattle into houses. But such as paid no regard to the 

22 word of the Lord left their cattle in the fields. Then the Lord 
said to Moses, Stretch forth thy hand towards heaven, and 
there shall be hail on all the land of Egypt, both on man and 

23 beast and on every herb which is on the ground. And Moses 
stretched forth his hand towards heaven and the Lord sent 
thunder and hail, and the fire streamed along the ground. And 
the Lord poured down a storm of hail on all the land of 

24 Egypt. And there was hail, with flaming fire among the hail. 
And the hail storm was excessively great such as had never 

25 been in Egypt from the day there was a nation in it. And 
throughout all the land of Egypt the hail smote both man and 



!-!-! X. EXODUS. 

beast. The hail also smote every herb of the field and broke 

26 to pieces all the trees in the fields. But in the land of Gesern 

27 where the children of Israel were, there was no hail. Then 
Pharao sent for Moses and Aaron and said to them, I have 

28 sinned this time. The Lord is righteous ; but as for me and 
my people, we are wicked. Pray therefore for me to the 
Lord; and let the voices of God and the hail and fire cease 

29 and I will send you away and you shall stay no longer. And 
Moses said to him, As soon as I have gone out of the city I 
will spread out my hands to the Lord and the voices will cease 
and there will be no more hail and rain, that thou mayst know 

30 that the earth is the Lord's. But as for thee and thy attend- 
ants I know that you do not yet fear the Lord. 

31 Now the flax and the barley were smitten, for the barley 

32 had eared and the flax was in seed. But the wheat and spelts 
were not smitten for they had been lately sown. 

33 So Moses went out from Pharao without the city and 
stretched forth his hands to the Lord. And the thunder ceased 
and the hail and the rain no longer poured down on the earth. 

34 And when Pharao saw that the rain and the hail and the thun- 
der were stayed he continued on in his course of sinning and 
hardened his own heart and the hearts of his servants. 

25 And when Pharao's heart was inflexible and he would not 
let the people go as the Lord had said to Moses, then the Lord 

X. spake to Moses saying, Go to Pharao, for I have suffered the 
heart of him and his attendants to continue stubborn that these 

2 my signs might come upon them in succession, that you may 
tell in the hearing of your children even to your children's 
children, with what contempt I have treated the Egyptians, 
even these my signs which I have done among them, and you 
will know that I am the Lord. 

3 Then Moses and Aaron went in before Pharao and said 
to him, Thus saith the Lord the God of the Hebrews. How 

4 long wilt thou refuse to reverence me ? Send away my people 
that they may serve me. Otherwise, if thou refuse to let my 

5 people go, behold at this time to-morrow I will bring a swarm 
of locusts on all thy borders and they shall cover the face of 
the ground, so that thou shalt not be able to see the ground ; 
and they shall devour all the remaining product of the land 



!-!-! X. EXODUS. 

which the hail hath left you ; and they shall devour every tree 
(I which groweth for you in the land. And thy houses and the 
houses of thy servants, all the houses of the Egyptians through- 
out the whole land, shall be filled in such a manner as thy fa- 
thers and their forefathers never saw from the time they had 
an existence in the land even to this day. And Moses turned 
and went out from Pharao. 

7 Upon this the attendants of Pharao said to him, How long 
shall this be a snare to us ? Send the men away that they may 
serve their God. Dost thou not know that Egypt is ruined ? 

8 Then they brought back Moses and Aaron to Pharao ; and he 
said to them, Go and serve the Lord your God. But who and 

9 who are going ? And Moses said, We must go with young and 
old, with our sons and daughters, and with our flocks and herds, 

10 for it is the festival of the Lord. Whereupon he said to them, 
The Lord be so with you ! as I send you away, must I also 
send away your substance ? Take notice ! you have wicked in- 

11 tentions. No : Let the men go and worship ; for this is what 
you desire. So they drove them out from the presence of 

12 Pharao. Then the Lord said to Moses, Stretch forth thy hand 
against the land of Egypt, and let the locust come up against 
the land. And it shall devour every herb of the field and all 

1 3 the fruit of the trees which the hail hath left. So Moses lifted 
up the staff towards heaven and the Lord brought a south wind 
upon the land all that day and all that night, and by the morn- 
ing the south wind had lifted up a swarm of locusts and wafted 

14 it over the whole land of Egypt : and it settled on all the bor- 
ders of Egypt — an immense swarm. Such a swarm of locusts 
had never been before it, nor shall there ever be such a one 

15 hereafter. It covered the whole surface of the ground and the 
land was wasted. And it devoured every herb of the ground 
and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left. There was 
nothing green left among the trees, or among the herbs of the 

1G field throughout all the land of Egypt. Upon this Pharao sent 
in haste for Moses and Aaron and said ; I have sinned in the 

17 sight of the Lord your God and against you ; therefore forgive 
this offence of mine this once more, and pray to the Lord your 

18 God; and let him remove from me this pestilence. Then Clo- 
ses went out from Pharao and prayed to God, and the Lord 

vol. i. o 



!-!-! XI. EXODUS. 

19 brought a contrary wind with great violence from the sea ; and 
it lifted up the swarm of locusts and cast it into the Red sea, and 
there was not one locust left in all the land of Egypt. 

20 But the Lord suffered Pharao's heart to be stubborn so that 

21 he did not let the Israelites go. Then the Lord said to Moses, 
Stretch forth thy hand towards heaven and let there be dark- 

22 ness over the land of Egypt — a palpable darkness. So Mo- 
ses stretched forth his hand towards heaven, and there was 
a darkness — a thick, turbid darkness over the whole land of 

23 Egypt three days. And for three days one saw not another, 
nor did any one rise from his place for three days ; but all the 
children of Israel had light in all the places where they were. 

24 Then Pharao sent for Moses and Aaron and said, Go and wor- 
ship the Lord your God. But you must leave your flocks and 

25 your herds. Your baggage may go with you. And Moses said, 
But thou must give us burnt offerings and sacrifices to offer 

26 to the Lord our God. Our cattle therefore must go with us. 
We cannot leave a hoof behind. For of them we must take 
to worship the Lord our God ; and we do not know with what 
we are to worship the Lord our God, until we come there. 

27 Now the Lord had suffered the heart of Pharao to continue 
stubborn so that he would not let the people go, therefore Pha- 
rao said, Begone from me. Take heed to thyself not to see my 
face any more. For the day thou appearest before me thou 

28 shalt die. Whereupon Moses said, Thou hast spoken. I will 
not appear again in thy presence. — 

XL (Xow the Lord had spoken to Moses and Aaron in the 
land of Egypt and said, I will inflict yet one stroke more on 
Pharao and on Egypt and after that he will send you away 
from his country. And when he shall send you away he will 
drive you out altogether in haste. Speak therefore privately to 
the ears of the people, and let every one ask of his neighbour 

2 vessels of silver and gold and raiment. And the Lord had 
given his people favour in the sight of the Egyptians and 

3 they supplied them. The man Moses also was become very 
great in the sight of the Egyptians and in the sight of Pharao, 
and in the eyes of his attendants, therefore Moses said,) 

I Thus saith the Lord, About midnight I will go into the 
5 midst of Egypt, and every first born in the land of Egypt shall 



!-!-! XII. EXODUS. 

die— from the first born of Pharao who sitteth on the throne, 
to the first born of the female slave who is at the grinding 

CD O 

6 mill, including also the first born of all the cattle. And there 
shall be a great cry through all the land of Egypt — such as 

7 hath never been, nor shall the like be again any more. But 
among all the children of Israel and their cattle not even a dog 
shall bark at man or beast, that thou mayst know what a dis- 
tinction the Lord will make between the Egyptians and the 

8 Israelites. And all these thy servants will come down to me 
and make obeisance to me and say, Go away thou and all 
thy people whom thou wouldst take with thee. 

9 Then Moses went out from Pharao with indignation 
and the Lord said to Moses, Pharao will not hearken to you 
that I may fully compleat my signs and my wonders in the 
land of Egypt. — 

10 (Though Moses and Aaron had done all those signs and 
those wonders in the land of Egypt in the presence of Pha- 
rao, yet the Lord suffered the heart of Pharao to be stub- 
born that he hearkened not to send away the Israelites out of 

XII. the land of Egypt. Now the Lord had spoken to Moses 

2 and Aaron in the land of Egypt saying, This month shall 
he to you the beginning of months. It is the first for you 

3 among the months of the year. Speak to all the congregation 
of the children of Israel and say, On the tenth of this month 
let them take every one a sheep according to the houses of 

4 patriarchal families, every one a sheep for a family ; and if 
there be too few in the family to be sufficient for one sheep, 

5 let him associate with him his next neighbour. With regard 
to the number of souls, every one shall collect to him a num- 
ber sufficient for a sheep. Your sheep shall be without blem- 
ish, a male and in its first year. You may take either from 

6 the lambs or the kids. And it shall be kept up by you until the 
fourteenth day of this month. Then the whole multitude of 
the congregation of the children of Israel shall kill it in the even- 

7 ing. And they shall take some of the blood and put it on the two 
side posts and on the lintel of the door of the house in which 

8 they are to eat it. And that night they shall eat the flesh roasted 
with fire. They shall also eat unleavened bread with bitter 

9 herbs. You shall not eat any of it raw or boiled in water, but 



!-!-! XII. EXODUS. 

only roasted with fire, head and feet and carcase together. 

10 Nothing of it shall be left till the morning. And yon shall not 
break a bone of it. And what is left of it till the morning you 

11 shall burn with fire. And in this manner you shall eat it. Your 
loins shall be girded. Your sandals shall be on your feet, and 

12 your staves in your hands. And you shall eat it in haste. It is 
a passover to the Lord. For in that night I will pass 
through the land of Egypt, and smite all the first born in the 
land of Egypt, both of man and beast. And upon all the gods 
of the Egyptians I will execute vengeance. I am the Lord. 

13 But the blood shall be to you for a sign on the houses in which 
you are. And when I see the blood, I will protect you and 
there shall be no destroying plague among you, when I smite 

II in the land of Egypt. And that day shall be to you for a me- 
morial. And you shall celebrate it as a festival to the Lord 

15 throughout all your generations. As an everlasting ordinance 
you shall celebrate it. Seven days you shall eat unleavened 
bread. And from the first day you shall remove all leaven out 
of your houses. Whoever shall eat leaven from the first to the 
seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from among Israel. 

16 And with regard to the first day, it shall be proclaimed holy; 
and the seventh day shall be holy to you. In them you shall 
not do any kind of sacrificial service, save that which must be 
done for every soul. This alone shall be done for you and you 

17 shall keep this commandment. For on that day I will lead out 
your host from the land of Egypt ; therefore you shall make 
the observance of that day an everlasting rite to your genera- 

18 tions. Beginning at evening with the fourteenth day of the 
first month, you shall eat unleavened bread until the evening 

19 of the twenty first day. For seven days there must be no lea- 
ven found in your houses. Whoever shall eat leavened bread, 
that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation of Is- 

20 rael ; whether he be a stranger or born in the land. You shall 
eat nothing that is leavened. But in all your habitations you 
must eat unleavened bread.) 

21 Moses therefore convened the whole senate of the chil- 
dren of Israel and said to them, Go take for yourselves the 

22 sheep according to your families and kill the passover ; and 
ye shall take a bunch of hyssop and having dipped it in the 



!-!-! XII. EXODUS. 

blood by the door you shall smear the lintel and the two side 
posts with some of the blood which is at the door; and none 
of you shall go out of the door of his house until the morn- 

23 ing. For the Lord will pass by to smite the Egyptians ; and 
when he shall see the blood on the lintel and on the two side 
posts, the Lord will pass over that door and will not suffer 

21 the destroyer to enter into your houses to smite. And this or- 
dinance you shall keep as a rite established for thee and thy 

25 children for ever. And when you come to the land which the 
Lord will give you as he hath spoken, you must keep up this 

26 religious service. And if your children say to you, What is the 

27 meaning of this religious service ? then you shall say to them, 
It is the sacrifice of the Passover of the Lord; because he 
passed over the houses of the Israelites in Egypt when he 
smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. Upon which 

28 the people bowed down and worshipped ; and the Israelites 

29 went and did as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron. And 
when they had so done, it came to pass that at midnight the 
Lord smote all the first bom in the land of Egypt, from the 
first born of Pharao, who sat on the throne to the first born of 
the captive in the dungeon, and even the first born of all the 

30 cattle. Whereupon Pharao arose by night he and all his at- 
tendants and all the Egyptians ; and there was a great cry in all 
the land of Egypt ; for there was not a family in which there 

31 was not one dead. And Pharao called for Moses and Aaron 
by night and said to them, Arise and depart from among my 

32 people, both you and the Israelites. Go and serve the Lord 
your God as you say. Take your flocks and your herds and 

33 go away, and bless me, I beseech you. And the Egyptians 
pressed the people with great earnestness to hurry them away 
out of the country ; for they said, We shall all die. 

31 So the people took up, upon their shoulders, their dough 
which had not yet been leavened— the masses of mixed up 

35 meal, bound up in their mantles— (now the Israelites had done 
as Moses commanded them; they had asked of the Egyptian 

36 gold and silver vessels and raiment, and the Lord had given 
his people favour in the sight of the Egyptians and they had 

37 supplied them, so they spoiled the Egyptians) and the Israel- 
ites to the number of six hundred thousand men on foot be- 



!-!-! XIII. EXODUS. 

sides women and children began their march from Harnesses 

38 to Succoth. And there went up with them a mixed multitude 

39 with nocks and herds and cattle in great abundance. And 
of the dough which they brought out of Egypt they baked 
unleavened cakes, for it had not been leavened : for the Egyp- 
tians hurried them away and they could not wait, and they had 
not dressed any provisions for themselves for the journey. 

40 Now the sojourning of the Israelites which they and their 
fathers had sojourned in the land of Egypt and in the land of 

41 Chanaan was four hundred and thirty years. And at the end 
of four hundred and thirty years all the host of the Lord came 

42 out of the land of Egypt. At night there was a watch for the 
Lord. This watch of the Lord was instituted that very night 

43 to bring them out of the land of Egypt. That it might be 
kept by all the children of Israel throughout their generations, 
the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, This is the law of the 

44 Passover — No stranger shall eat of it ; but every servant born 
at home or bought with money thou shalt circumcise and then 

45 he may eat of it. A sojourner or a hireling shall not eat of it. 

46 In one family it shall be eaten, and you must not carry any of 
the flesh abroad out of the house ; nor shall you break a bone 

47 thereof. All the congregation of the children of Israel shall keep 

48 this festival. And if any proselyte come to you to keep the pass- 
over to the Lord, thou shalt circumcise all his males and then he 
may come and keep it, and he shall be as a native of the land. 

49 No uncircumcised person shall eat of it. There shall be one law 

50 for the home born and for the proselyte who shall come among 
you. Now the children of Israel had done as the Lord com- 
manded Moses and Aaron; and when they had done so, on 
that very day the Lord led the Israelites out of the land of 
Egypt with their host. 

XIII. Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Consecrate 

2 to me every first boru. Every first born among the children 

3 of Israel, whether man or beast, is mine. Therefore Moses 
said to the people, Kemember this day, in which you came 
out from the land of Egypt — from the house of bondage. For 
with a strong hand the Lord hath brought you out from this 

4 place ; and let no leaven be eaten, for on this day you are 

5 marching out in the month of new things. And when the 
Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land of the 



!-!-! XIII. EXODUS. 

Chananites and the Chettites and the Amorites, and the Evites 
and the Jebnsites and the Gergasites and the Pherezites which 
the Lord with an oath promised to thy fathers that he would 
give thee — a land flowing with milk and honey, thou shalt 

6 perform this religious service in this month. Six days you 
shall eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall 

7 be a festival to the Lord. Seven days you shall eat unleaven- 
ed bread. Nothing that is leavened shall be seen with thee ; 

8 nor shalt thou have leaven in all thy borders. And on that 
day thou shalt tell thy son and say, This is on the account of 
what the Lord God did for me, when I came out of Egypt. 

i) And it shall be to thee for a sign on thy hand and for a me- 
morial before thy eyes, that the law of the Lord may be in thy 
mouth ; for with a strong hand the Lord thy God hath brought 

10 thee out of Egypt ; therefore you shall observe this law in revolv- 

11 ing seasons from year to year. And when the Lord thy God shall 
have brought thee into the land of the Chananites, as he sware 

12 to thy fathers, and shall give it to thee, thou shalt set apart eve- 
ry first born — all the males for the Lord. Every firstling of the 
kine or among the cattle which thou mayst have, even all the 

13 males thou shalt consecrate to the Lord. Every firstling of an 
ass thou shalt exchange for a sheep, and if thou wilt not ex- 
change it thou must redeem it. And every male first born 

14 of thy children thou shalt redeem. And if at any time hereaf- 
ter, thy son should ask thee saying, What is the meaning of 
this? thou shalt say to him, Because with a strong hand the 

15 Lord brought us out of the land of Egypt — from the house of 
bondage; and, when Pharao hardened himself against send- 
ing us away, the Lord slew every first born in the land of 
Egypt, both the first born of men and the first born of cattle, 
therefore 1 sacrifice all firstlings— all the males to the Lord : 

16 and every male first born of my children 1 must redeem. And 
it shall be for a sign on thy hand, and immoveably before thy 
eyes. For with a strong hand the Lord brought thee out of 
Egypt. 

17 Now when Pharao sent away the people, God did not lead 
them by the way to the land of the Philistines, because it was 
near. For God said, Perhaps the people will repent when they 

18 see war and will return to Egypt : therefore God led the peo- 



!-!-! XIV. EXODUS. 

pie by a circuitous march to the wilderness — to the Bed sea. 
And in the fifth generation the Israelites went up out of the 

19 land of Egypt. And Moses took with him the bones of Joseph. 
For with an oath he had adjured the Israelites saying, The Lord 
will assuredly visit you and you shall carry hence my bones 
with you. 

20 And the children of Israel removed from Succoth and en- 

21 camped at Otham on the edge of the wilderness. And God 
went before them, by day in a pillar of a cloud to shew them 

22 the way, and at night in a pillar of fire. And there was no 
failure of the pillar of a cloud by day, and of the pillar of fire by 
night before all the people. 

XIV. Then the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Speak to the 

2 children of Israel and let them turn and encamp on the ground 
between Magdolus and the sea, from the sheep cot on the one 

3 side to Beelsepphon on the other. In front of these thou slialt 
encamp by the sea; whereupon Pharao will say to his people, 
The Israelites have lost their way in the land for the wilderness 

4 hath shut them in. And I will make Pharao's heart stout, so 
that he will pursue them, and I shall be glorified by Pharao 
and by all his army. And all the Egyptians shall know that 

5 I am the Lord. Accordingly the Israelites did so. Now when 
the king of the Egyptians was told that the people had fled, his 
heart and the heart of his servants were turned against the peo- 
ple. And they said, What is this we have done in sending the 

6 Israelites away from serving us ? Therefore Pharao equipt his 

7 chariots and took all his people with him. And having selected 
six hundred chosen chariots and all the cavalry of the Egyp- 

8 tians and officers of the highest rank over all (for the Lord had 
emboldened the heart of Pharao king of Egypt and of his at- 

9 tendants) he pursued the Israelites. Though the Israelites had 
gone out with a high hand, yet the Egyptians pursued them 
with all the cavalry and the chariots of Pharao. And his horse- 
men and his army found them encamped by the sea with the 

10 sheep cot on one flank and Beelsepphon on the other. And as 
Pharao approached ; the children of Israel raising their eyes 
saw the Egyptians encamping in their rear and were greatly 

11 terrified. And the Israelites cried to the Lord, and said to 
Moses, Was it because there were no graves in the land of 



Oh. XIV. EXODUS. 

Egypt, that thou hast brought us out to die in the wilderness ? 
Why hast thou dealt thus with us in bringing us out of Egypt ? 

12 Is not this what we told thee in Egypt saying, Let us alone, 
that we may serve the Egyptians ? For it was better for us to 

13 serve the Egyptians than to die in this wilderness. Where- 
upon Moses said to the people, Take courage; stand still and 
see the salvation which cometh from the Lord — which he will 
work for you this day. For in the manner you have seen the 
Egyptians this day, you shall never see them again any more. 

14 The Lord will fight for you. Be ye therefore silent. 

15 Now the Lord had said to Moses, Why criest thou to me ? 
Speak to the children of Israel and let them prepare for march- 

16 ing. And lift thou up thy staff and stretch forth thy hand over 
the sea and divide it, and let the children of Israel go into the 

17 midst of the sea as on dry ground. And behold I will embold- 
en the heart of Pharao and of all the Egyptians and they will 
go in after them. And I shall be glorified by Pharao and by 

18 all his army and by his chariots and by his horses. And all the 
Egyptians shall know, that I am the Lord when I make my- 

19 self glorious by Pharao and by his chariots and his horses. Now 
the Angel of the Lord who marched before the camp of the 
Israelites had removed and went behind them, and the pillar of 
cloud had removed from the front and taken its station in the 

20 rear. And when it came between the camp of the Egyptians 
and the camp of Israel and had taken its station ; there came on 
a thick darkness and night intervened so that they did not in- 

21 termix one with the other during that whole night. And Mo- 
ses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the Lord restrain- 
ed the sea that whole night with a strong south easterly wind 
and made the sea dry ground ; and the water was cleft asunder. 

22 And the Israelites went into the midst of the sea as on dry 
ground. And the water thereof was a wall on the right and a 

23 wall on the left. And the Egyptians pursued and went in after 
them, even all Pharao's cavalry and his chariots and chari- 

24 oteers, into the midst of the sea. And in the morning watch, 
the Lord cast a look on the army of the Egyptians with the 

25 pillar of fire and cloud, and threw the Egyptian army into con- 
fusion, and entangled their chariot wheels and caused them to 
drag on heavily ; whereupon the Egyptians said, Let us flee from 

VOL. i. p 



!-!-! XV. EXODUS. 

tlie face of Israel, for the Lord fighteth for them against the 

26 Egyptians. Then the Lord said to Moses, Stretch forth thy 
hand over the sea and bring back the water to its place ; and let 
it overwhelm the Egyptians, their chariots and their horse- 

27 men. So Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and 
about day break the water was brought back to its place. And 
when the Egyptians were fleeing below the water the Lord 

28 shook them off in the midst of the sea ; and the water being 
brought back to its place overwhelmed the chariots and the 
horsemen and all the host of Pharao who had marched after 

29 the Israelites into the sea, so that not one of them was left. But 
the Israelites marched on dry ground in the midst of the sea, 
and the water was a wall to them on their right and on their 

30 left. Thus did the Lord on that day deliver Israel out of the 
hand of the Egyptians. And Israel saw the Egyptians dead on 

31 the sea shore. And when Israel saw that great hand — what 
the Lord had done to the Egyptians, the people feared the 
Lord, and they put confidence in God and in Moses his ser- 
vant. 

XV. Then sung Moses and the Israelites this song to G-od, 
and spoke saying, 

Let us sing to the Lord, 

For he is gloriously exalted ; 

Horse and rider he hath thrown in the sea. 

2 He was my help and defence for safety : 

He is my God, therefore I will praise him — 
My father's God, therefore I will extol him — 

3 A Lord crushing battles, his name is The Lord. 

4 Pharao's chariots and host he threw in the sea — 
Chosen bands — Officers of highest rank. 

They were swallowed up in the Keel sea. 

5 In the sea, he whelmed them ; 

They sank to the bottom like a stone. 

6 Thy right hand, Lord, is glorious in power. 
Thy right hand, Lord, dashed enemies to pieces. 

7 With thy great glory thou didst crush thine adversaries. 
Thou sentest forth thy wrath ; it consumed them like stubble. 

8 At the blast of thy wrath the water parted — 
The waters were compacted like a wall — 



Cb. XV. EXODUS. 

The waves were condensed in the midst of the sea. 
9 The enemy said, I will pursue and overtake, 

I will divide the spoil — I will glut my vengeance : 
My sword shall slay ; my hand shall prevail. 

10 Thou didst send forth thy blast, the sea covered them ; 
They sank like lead in the mighty water. 

11 Who among the gods is like thee, Lord? 
Who is like thee ? G-lorifled among Holies ; 
Marvellous among Glories — working miracles ! 

12 Thou didst stretch forth thy right hand, 
The earth swallowed them up, 

13 In thy kindness thou hast been the guide 
Of this thy people whom thou hast redeemed. 
By thy power thou hast called them forth 

To thy holy place for resting. 

14 Nations have heard and are troubled : 

Pangs have taken hold of the inhabitants of Phylisteim ; 

15 The Emirs of Edom are already in commotion ; 

And as for the chiefs of Moab, horror hath seized them : 
All the inhabitants of Chanaan are appalled. 

16 On them let dread and terror fall. 

By the greatness of thine arm may they be petrified, 

Till thy people pass through, Lord — 

Till this thy people pass by, whom thou hast purchased. 

17 Introduce and plant them on the mount of thy heritage — 

In the settlement thou hast prepared for thy dwelling, 

Lord — 

The sanctuary, Lord, which thy hands have prepared. 

18 The Lord reigneth for ever and for evermore. 

19 Because Pharao's cavalry with chariots and charioteers went 
into the sea, and the Lord brought upon them the water of the 
sea ; and the Israelites marched in the midst of the sea on dry 

20 ground; therefore Mariarn the prophetess the sister of Aaron 
took in her hand a timbrel and all the women went out after 

21 her with timbrels in choirs, and Mariam led the song for 
them, saying, 

Let us sing to the Lord, 

For he is gloriously exalted : 

Horse and rider he hath thrown in the sea — 



Oh. XVI. EXODUS. 

22 Then Moses drew oft' the Israelites from the Red sea ; and 
led them into the wilderness of Sour, and they marched three 

23 days in the wilderness and found no water to drink. And when 
they came to Merra they could not drink the water there, for 
it was bitter. Therefore they called the name of that place Bit- 

24 terness. And the people murmured against Moses and said, 

25 What are we to drink ? Upon this Moses cried to the Lord ; 
and the Lord shewed him a piece of wood and he threw it into 
the water, and the water was made sweet. 

There he instituted for them rules of rectitude and judg- 

26 ments, and there he proved them and said, If thou wilt hearken 
to the voice of the Lord thy God, and do the things well pleas- 
ing in his sight, and hearken to his commandments, and keep all 
these his rules of rectitude, I will not bring upon thee any of the 
diseases which I brought on the Egyptians, for I am the Lord 
thy God who healeth thee. 

27 Then they came to Aileim, where there were twelve foun- 
tains of water and seventy palm trees, and they encamped there 
by the water. 

XVI. And the whole congregation of the children of Israel 
removed from Aileim and came to the wilderness of Sin, which 

2 is between Aileim and Sina. And on the fifteenth day of the 
second month after their coming out of Egypt all the congre- 
gation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and 

3 Aaron. The Israelites indeed said to them, Oh that we had 
died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we 
sat by the pots of flesh meat and ate bread in plenty ! For 
you have brought us to this wilderness to kill this whole as- 

4 sembly with hunger. Whereupon the Lord said to Moses, 
Behold I am going to rain bread from heaven for you. And 
the people shall go and gather it day by day, that I may try 

5 them whether they will walk in my law or not. But on the 
sixth day they must be provident in respect to what they bring 
in. It shall be twice as much as they gather daily. 

6 Then Moses and Aaron said to all the congregation of the 
Israelites, In the evening you shall know that the Lord hath 

7 brought you out of the land of Egypt, and in the morning you 
shall see the glory of the Lord, by his hearkening to your nuir- 
murings against God. As for us, what are we that you should 



!-!-! XVI. EXODUS. 

8 murmur against us? (Now Moses had dictated, by the Lord 's 
giving you in the evening flesh to eat and in the morning bread 
in 'plenty, because the Lord hath heard your murmurings which 
you utter against us. But as for us what are we? your mur- 
muring is not against us but against God.) 

9 Then Moses said to Aaron, Say to all the congregation 
of the children of Israel, Attend in the presence of Grod, for 

10 he hath heard your murmuring. And when Aaron had spoken 
to all the congregation of the Israelites and they had turned 
about towards the wilderness, the glory of the Lord appeared 

11 in a cloud, and the Lord spoke to Moses saying, I have heard 

12 the murmuring of the Israelites. Speak to them and say, To- 
wards evening you shall eat flesh and in the morning you shall 
be plentifully supplied with bread. And you shall know that 

13 I am the Lord, your God. Accordingly there came up in the 

14 evening a flock of quails, which covered the camp, and in the 
morning while the dew lay around the camp, behold on the 
face of the wilderness something small like coriander, white 

15 like hoar frost, on the ground ! And when the Israelites saw 
this they said one to another, What is this ? for they did not 

16 know what it was. LTpon which Moses said to them. This 
is the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat. This is 
what the Lord hath commanded, Gather of it, every one for 
his family a gomer a head according to the number of souls, 

17 you must every one gather for those in the tent with you. 

And the children of Israel did so and gathered some more 

18 and some less, and when they measured it by the gomer, he 
who had gathered much had nothing over, and he who had 
gathered little did not fall short. Every one had gathered suf- 

19 ficient for the family with him. Then Moses said to them, 

20 Let none leave any of it till the morning. Notwithstanding this 
they hearkened not to Moses, but some left of it till the morn- 
ing. And it bred worms and gave an offensive smell. On 

21 which Moses was angry with them. So they gathered it every 

22 morning, every one a sufficiency for his family. And when the 
sun grew warm, it melted away. 

Now on the sixth day when they were gathering a double 
quantity, two gomers for every one, all the heads of the con- 

23 gregation came and told Moses, whereupon lie said to them, Is 



!-!-! XVII. EXODUS. 

not this what the Lord spoke, Sabbaths are a rest holy to the 
Lord ? As for to-morrow, bake what you chuse to bake and 
boil what you chuse to boil and what is left lay up for to-mor- 

24 row. So they left some of it till the morning as Moses com- 
manded them and it did not become putrid, nor was there a 

25 worm in it. Then Moses said to them, Eat it to-day, for to- 

26 day is the Sabbath to the Lord. It will not be found in the field. 
Six days you shall gather but because the Sabbaths are on the 

27 seventh day, therefore in it there will be none. And it came 
to pass that on the seventh day some of the people went out to 

28 gather, but found none. Whereupon the Lord said to Moses, 
How long will you refuse to hearken to my commandments and 

29 my law ? You see that because the Lord gave you this day for 
sabbaths, therefore on the sixth day he gave you the bread of 
two days. Abide ye every one at home. Let none go out from 

30 his place on the seventh day. So the people rested on the se- 
venth day. 

31 Now the Israelites called its name Manna. It was like cori- 
ander seed. It was white ; and its taste was like a cake made 

32 with honey. And Moses said, This is what the Lord hath 
commanded, Fill the gomer with Manna to be laid up for your 
posterity, that they may see the bread which you ate in the 
wilderness, when the Lord brought you out of the land of 

33 Egypt. Then Moses said to Aaron, Take a golden urn and 
put therein the full of a gomer of Manna ; and thou shalt lay 

34 it up before God to be kept for your posterity. As the Lord 
commanded Moses so Aaron laid it up before the testimony 

35 that it might be kept. And the children of Israel ate this Manna 
forty years till they came to the inhabited land. They ate it 
till they came to the border of Phoenicia. Now the gomer is the 
tenth of the trimeter. 

XVII. When all the congregation of the Israelites had remov- 
ed from the wilderness of Sin according to their encampments 
by the command of the Lord and encamped at Eaphidin and 

2 there was no water for the people to drink, and the people were 
reviling Moses and saying, Give us water that we may drink, 
Moses said to them, Why do you revile me ? And why do you 

3 tempt the Lord ? Now when the people had thirsted there for 
water and murmured against Moses saying, How is this ? Hast 



!-!-! XVIII. EXODUS. 

thou brought us up out of Egypt to kill us aud our children and 

4 our cattle with thirst ? Moses cried to the Lord and said, What 
shall I do for this people ? They are almost ready to stone me. 

5 Upon which the Lord said to Moses, Go on at the head of the 
people, and take thee some of the elders of the people, and 
take in thy hand the staff with which thou didst smite the river. 

6 And thou shalt go to the place where I before caused thee to 
stand on the rock at Choreb ; and thou shalt smite the rock, 
and water will gush out that the people may drink. And Moses 

7 did so in the presence of the Israelites, and he called the name 
of that place, Temptation and Upbraiding, because of the up- 
braiding of the Israelites, and because they tempted the Lord 

8 and said, Is the Lord among us or not? Now Amalek had 
come and made war on Israel at Eaphidin, upon which Moses 
said to Joshua, Select for thyself able men and go out and draw 

9 up in array to-morrow against Amalek; when lo I have stood 

10 on the top of that hill with the staff of God in my hand. So 
Joshua did as Moses commanded him. And when he had gone 
out and drawn up in array against Amalek, and Moses and 

11 Aaron and Hur had gone up to the top of the hill, it came to 
pass that when Moses held up his hands Israel prevailed ; but 

12 when he let down his hands Amalek prevailed. But Moses 
hands were heavy, therefore they took a stone and put it under 
him and he sat thereon ; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his 

13 hands, one on one side, and the other, on the other. So his 
hands were stayed up till the going down of the sun and Jo- 
shua discomfited Amalek and his whole people with the slaughter 

14 of the sword. Then the Lord said to Moses, Write this in a 
book to keep it in remembrance ; and rehearse it in the hear- 
ing of Joshua, that I will entirely blot out the remembrance 

15 of Amalek from under heaven. And Moses built an altar to 
the Lord and called its name, The Lord my refuge; because 
with a secret hand the Lord fight eth against Amalek from ge- 
neration to generation. 

XVIII. Now when Jothor the priest of Madiam, Moses' father 
in law heard of all that the Lord had done for his people Israel, 

2 (for while the Lord was bringing Israel out of Egypt Jothor 
the father in law of Moses had taken home Sepphora, Moses' 

3 wife, after she had gone back, with her two sons, of whom the 



!-!-! XV1I1. EXODUS. 

name of one was G-ersam ; for he said, I was a stranger in a 

4 strange land ; and the name of the other Eliezar ; for the God 
of my fathers, said he, hath been my help, and hath delivered 

5 me out of the hand of Pharao) Jothor the father in law of Mo- 
ses came out to him with his sons and his wife to the wilder - 

6 ness where he was encamped by the mount of God. And 
when they told Moses saying, Behold Jothor thy father in law 

7 is coming to thee with thy wife and thy two sons with him, 
Moses went out to meet his father in law and made obeisance 
to him and kissed him. And when they had embraced each 

8 other he conducted them to his tent. And Moses told his father 
in law all that the Lord had done to Pharao and to all the Egyp- 
tians for Israel's sake, and all the difficulties which they had 
encountered on the way, and how the Lord had rescued them 
out of the hand of Pharao and out of the hand of the Egyp- 

9 tians. Whereupon Jothor was enrapt in wonder at all the good 
things which the Lord had done for them in delivering them 
out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pha- 

10 rao; and Jothor said, Blessed be the Lord. Because he hath 
delivered these out of the hand of the Egyptians and out of the 

11 hand of Pharao, I know now that the Lord is great above all 
the gods, for this reason because they were set against these. 

12 Then Jothor the father in law of Moses took whole burnt offer- 
ings and sacrifices for God ; and Aaron and all the elders of 
Israel came to eat bread before God with Moses' father in law. 

13 And on the morrow Moses sat to administer justice to the peo- 
ple, and all the people attended on Moses from early in the 

14 morning till late in the evening. And when Jothor saw all that 
he did for the people, he said, What is this that thou dost for the 
people ? Why hast thou sitten alone and all the people attended 

15 thee from morning till night ? And Moses said to his father in 
law, Because the people come to me to have a determination 

16 from God. For when a controversy happeneth among them and 
they come to me, I administer justice to every one, and teach 

17 them the statutes of God and his law. Thereupon Moses' father 
in law said to him, Thou dost not transact this business right. 

18 Both thou and this people with thee must needs be worn down 
by this intolerable service. This business is too fatiguing for 

19 thee. Thou canst not perform it thyself alone. Now therefore 



!-!-! XIX. EXODUS. 

hearken to me and I will advise thee; and God be with thee. 

20 Be thon to the people as the Oracle of God; and lay their 
cases before God ; and testify to thern the statutes of God and 
his law ; and point out to them the ways in which they shall walk, 

21 and the works which they shall do : but look out for thyself from 
among all the people, for able, pious men, men of integrity 
who hate pride ; and set these over them as rulers of thousands, 
and rulers of hundreds, and rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens ; 
and let them administer justice to the people on all occasions : 

22 and the matter which is too high for them, they shall lay before 
thee ; but causes easily determined they themselves shall de- 

23 cide. Thus they will remove a burden from thee and help thee. 
If thou do this God will strengthen tbee so that thou shalt be 
able to endure, and all this people shall go to their place with 

24 peace. So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, 

25 and did all that he said. And when Moses had chosen able 
men from among all Israel and made them rulers of thousands, 

26 and rulers of hundreds, and rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens, 
with orders to administer justice to the people on all occasions, 
and that they should lay before him the matter which was too 
high for them ; but the causes easily determined they them- 

27 selves should decide ; then Moses gave his father in law leave 
to depart and he returned to his own land. 

XIX. Now on the first day of the third month after the depar- 
ture of the Israelites out of the land of Egypt, on the very day 

2 they came to the wilderness of Sina — when they had re- 
moved from Raphadin and came to the wilderness of Sina 

3 and Israel were encamping there before the mount, Moses 
went up to the mount of God. And God called to him out of 

4 the mount and said, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, 
and announce to the children of Israel — You have seen what 
I have done to the Egyptians ; and how I have taken you up 

5 as on the wings of eagles and brought you to myself. Now 
therefore if you will hearken diligently to my voice and 
keep my covenant, you shall be to me a peculiar people above 

G all the nations ; for the whole earth is mine : but as for you, 
you shall be a royal priesthood and a holy nation. These words 

7 thou shalt deliver to the children of Israel. Upon this Moses 
came and called the elders of the people and laid before them 

VOL. I. Q 



Cb. XIX. EXODUS. 

8 all these words which God enjoined on them. And all the peo- 
ple with one consent answered and said, All that God hath said 
we will do and we will be obedient. And Moses carried up 

9 these words to God. Then the Lord said to Moses, Behold I 
will come to thee in a pillar of cloud, that the people may hear 

10 me speaking to thee and believe thee for ever. — When Moses 
told the Lord the words of the people the Lord said to Moses, 

11 Go down and testify to the people and purify them to-day and 
to-morrow and let them wash their garments and be ready 
against the third day ; for on the third day the Lord will de- 

12 scend upon mount Sina in the sight of all the people. There- 
fore thou shalt remove the people to some distance round 
about and say, Take heed to yourselves not to go up to the 
mount nor touch any part of it. Whoever shall touch the 

13 mount shall surely die. A hand shall not touch him, for he shall 
be stoned with stones or shot with a dart. Whether man or 
beast it shall not live. When the voices and the trumpets and 
the cloud are gone from the mount, they may go up to the 
mount. 

14 So Moses went down from the mount to the people and 

15 purified them, and they washed their garments. And he said to 
the people, Be ready, for three days you must not approach a 
wife. 

16 And it came to pass on the third day that about dawn there 
were thunders and lightnings and a thick cloud on mount 
Sina, and the voice of the trumpet sounded loud, so that all 

17 the people in the camp were terrified. Then Moses led forth 
the people out of the camp to meet God, and they halted at the 

18 foot of the mount. The whole mountain Sina was enveloped 
with smoke, because God had descended upon it in fire. And 

19 the smoke ascended like the smoke of a furnace, so that all 
the people were exceedingly amazed. 

Still the sounds of the trumpet waxed louder and louder. 
Moses had spoken and God had answered him by a voice. And 

20 the Lord descended upon mount Sina on the summit of the 
mount, and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount, 

21 and Moses went up. And God spoke to Moses saying, Go 
down and testify to the people; perad venture they may come 
nigh to God to observe, and a multitude of them may perish. 



!-!-! XX. EXODUS. 

22 And let the priests who come near to the Lord God be puri- 

23 fled, lest peradventure the Lord withdraw from them. And 
Moses said to God, The people cannot advance to mount 
Sina; for thou hast testified to us saying, Set apart the mount 

24 and hallow it. But the Lord said to him, Away; go down 
and come up thou and Aaron with thee ; but let not the 
priests nor the people presume to come up to God lest perad- 

25 venture the Lord destroy some of them. And when Moses 
had gone down to the people and spoken to them, the Lord 
spoke all these words saying, 

XX. I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the 

3 land of Egypt— out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt 
have no other gods besides me. 

4 Thou shalt not make for thyself an idol, nor the likeness 
of any thing, which is in the heaven above, or in the earth be- 
low, or in the waters under the earth; thou shalt not worship 

5 them ; nor serve them ; for I, the Lord thy God, am a zealous 
God, retributing to them who hate me the sins of fathers upon 

6 children to the third and fourth generation ; but shewing mer- 
cy for thousands [of generations] to them who love me and 
keep my commandments. 

7 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in 
vain; for the Lord thy God will not hold him guiltless who 
taketh his name in vain. 

8 Kemember the day of the sabbaths to hallow it. Six days 

9 labour and do all thy works ; but on the seventh day are sab- 

10 baths to the Lord thy God ; On it thou shalt not do any work, 
thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man servant, nor 
thy maid servant, nor thy ox, nor thy ass, nor any of thy cattle, 

11 nor the stranger who sojourneth with thee; for in six days the 
Lord made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all that 
are in them, and rested on the seventh day : therefore the 
Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it. 

12 Honour thy father and thy mother that it may be well 
with thee, and that thou mayst live long in that good land, 
which the Lord thy God giveth thee. 

13 Thou shalt not commit adultery. 

14 Thou shalt not steal. 

15 Thou shalt not commit murder. 



!-!-! XXI. EXODUS. 

16 Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour. 

17 Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife ; thou shalt not 
covet thy neighbour's house, nor his field, nor his man ser- 
vant, nor his maid servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any of 
his cattle, nor any thing belonging to thy neighbour. 

18 And all the people looked towards the thunder and the light- 
nings and the sound of the trumpet and the mount which was 
smoking ; and all the people being struck with terror stood at 

19 a distance. And they said to Moses, Speak thou to us : and 

20 let not God speak to us lest we die. Whereupon Moses 
said to them, Take courage ; for God is come to you to 
prove you, that the dread of him may be [in you, that you 

21 may not sin. Then the people stood afar off, and Moses 

22 went into the thick darkness, where God was. And the 
Lord said to Moses, Thus shalt thou say to the house of 

23 Jacob and announce to the children of Israel, You have seen 
that I have spoken to you from heaven. You shall not make 
for yourselves gods of silver, nor shall you make for yourselves 

24 gocls of gold. An altar of earth you shall make for me, and 
sacrifice thereon your whole burnt offerings and your offerings 
of thanksgiving, both your sheep and your young bulls in 

25 every place where I record my name. And I will come to thee 
and bless thee. And if thou makest for me an altar of stones ; 
thou shalt not build it of hewn stones : for thou hast put thy 

26 workmanship on them and they are polluted. Thou shalt not 
go up to my altar by steps, that thou mayst not discover thy 
nakedness on it. 

XXI. And these are the rules of rectitude which thou shalt set 
before them. 

2 If thou purchase a Hebrew servant, he shall serve thee six 
years, but in the seventh year he shall go out free without 

3 ransom. If he came in alone, he shall go out alone ; but if his 

4 wife came with him his wife shall go out with him. And if his 
master hath given him a wife and she hath born him sons or 
daughters, the wife and the children shall belong to his master, 

5 and he shall go out alone. And if the servant shall answer and 
say, I love my master and my wife and my children, I will not go 

6 away free, his master shall bring him to God's court of Justice 
and there lead him to the door — to the door post, and his mas- 



!-!-! XXI. EXODUS. 

ter shall bore his ear through with an awl and he shall serve 
him for ever. 

7 When any man selleth his daughter to be a handmaid she 

8 shall not go away as those who are in bondage go. If she please 
not her master provided he betrothed her for himself, he shall 
let her be redeemed ; but he is not her master to sell her into 
another family, because he hath broken covenant with her : 

9 but if he betroth her for his son, he shall deal by her accord- 

10 ing to the privilege of daughters. And if the son take another 
for himself, he shall not deprive her of food and raiment and 

11 her marriage rites. And if he do not these three for her she 
shall go away ransom free. 

12 If any one smite another and he die, he shall be put to 

13 death. But if he was not a voluntary agent, but God deliver- 
ed into his hands, I will appoint for thee a place to which he 

14 who hath killed shall flee. But if any one lie in wait for his 
neighbour to kill him insidiously, and flee, thou shalt drag him 
from my altar to put him to death. 

15 He who smiteth his father or his mother shall be put to 
death. 

10 He who curseth his father or his mother shall be put to 
death. 

17 He who stealeth any of the children of Israel,' and having 
got him in his power selleth him, or if he be found with him, 
shall be put to death. 

18 If two men quarrel and one smite the other with a stone 

19 or his fist and he dieth not, but is confined to his bed ; if the 
man rise and walk abroad on his staff, he who smote him shall 
be acquitted but shall pay for his loss of time and the expence 
of his cure. 

20 If a man smite his man servant or his maid servant with a 
staff ; and the servant die under his hand, vengeance shall be 

21 taken by a judicial process ; but if the servant live a day or two, 
let no vengeance be taken, for he is his money. 

22 If two men fight and strike a woman with child and she mis- 
carry of an embrio, atonement shall be made by a fine. Ac- 
cording as the husband of the woman shall with a judicial de- 

23 cision lay upon him, he shall pay : but if the child be compleatly 

24 organised he shall give, life for life ; eye for eye ; tooth fur 



!-!-! XXII. EXODUS. 

25 tooth ; hand for hand ; foot for foot ; burning for burning ; 

26 wound for wound ; stripe for stripe. But if a man smite the 
eye of a man servant, or the eye of a maid servant ; and it become 

27 blind, he shall set them free for their eye's sake. And if he beat 
out the tooth of a man servant, or the tooth of a maid servant, 
he shall set them free for their tooth's sake. 

28 If a bull gore a man or a woman and he or she die, the bull 
shall be stoned to death and his flesh shall not be eaten ; but 

29 the owner of the bull shall be held guiltless : but if the bull 
hath heretofore been accustomed to push with his horns, and 
this hath been made known to his owner, and he hath not shut 
him up ; if he kill a man or woman, the bull shall be stoned and 

30 his owner also may be put to death. But if a fine shall be laid 

31 upon him, he shall pay as a ransom for his life whatever they lay 
upon him. And if the bull shall gore a son or a daughter, they 

32 shall deal with him according to this law. But if the bull shall 
gore a man servant or a maid servant he shall pay their master 
thirty didrachms of silver and the bull shall be stoned. 

33 If any man open a pit, or dig a pit and do not cover it, and 
an ox or an ass fall therein, the owner of the pit shall make it 

34 good. He shall pay the owner of them, and the dead beast 
shall be his. 

35 If any man's bull gore the bull of his neighbour and he die, 
they shall sell the live bull and divide the money and they shall 

36 divide the dead bull. But if the bull be noted for having been 
heretofore accustomed to push with his horns, and this hath 
been made known to his owner, and he hath not shut him up 
he shall be fined bull for bull and the dead bull shall be his. 

XXII. If any man steal an ox or a sheep and kill, or sell it, 
he shall pay as a fine five oxen for the ox, and four sheep for 
the sheep. 

2 If a thief be found in the act of breaking in and be struck 

3 and die, he who struck him is not liable to death ; but if the 
sun was risen upon him he is liable and may be put to death. 

4 If a thief hath no property, let him be sold for the theft. 
If the thing stolen, whatever it be from an ass to a sheep, be 
left alive and found in his hand, he shall be fined double. 

5 If any man cause a field or a vineyard to be eaten and shall 
send out his cattle to feed upon the field of another, with the 



!-!-! XXII. EXODUS. 

produce of his own field he shall make restitution ; and if he 
shall cause a whole field to be eaten up ; with his choicest field 
or his choicest vineyard he shall make compensation. 

6 If a fire break out and catch in thorns and consume corn 
on the threshing floors or on the stalk, or in the field, he who 
kindled the fire shall make compensation. 

7 If any man deliver to his neighbour money or furniture to 
keep, and they be stolen out of the man's house; the thief, if 

8 he be found, shall be fined double. But if the thief cannot be 
found, the owner of the house shall go before God and be ex- 
amined on oath whether he may not in some manner have ac- 

9 ted wrong touching the deposit of his neighbour. On every 
supposed act of injustice touching an ox or an ass or a sheep 
or raiment or any kind of deposit which is lost, whatever it 
may be, the cause of both parties shall come before God, and 
he whom God pointeth out shall pay his neighbour two fold. 

10 And if a man deliver to his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or 
a sheep, or any beast to keep, and it be hurt or die, or be car- 

1 1 ried off by an enemy unknown to any one, there shall be an oath 
of God between the parties, that he hath not in auy manner ac- 
ted wrong touching the deposit of his neighbour ; and the 
owner shall thus be satisfied ; and the other shall not make it 

12 good. But if it be stolen from him he shall make restitution 

13 to the owner ; and if it be torn by wild beasts he shall bring 

14 the owner to the prey and shall not make compensation. But 
if any one borrow of his neighbour and that which was bor- 
rowed be hurt or die or be carried off by an enemy and the 

15 owner be not with it, he shall make compensation ; but if the 
owner be with it he shall not make it good, and if it be hired 
he shall have it for the hire of it. 

16 If any man delude an unmarried virgin and lie with her, 

17 he shall by paying a dowry purchase her for a wife : but if her 
father absolutely refuse and will not consent to give her to him 
for a wife, he shall pay the father in money to the amount of 
the dowry paid for virgins. 

18 You shall not protect sorcerers. 

19 Every act of bestiality you shall punish with death. 

20 He who sacrificeth to any god save to the Lord alone shall 
be destroyed by death. 



!-!-! XXIII. EXODUS. 

21 A stranger you shall not injure ; nor shall you afflict him ; 
for you were strangers in the land of Egypt. 

22 A widow and an orphan you shall not afflict. If you in any- 

23 wise afflict them and they cry to me, I will hear their voice 

24 and my wrath will be kindled, and I will slay you with the 
sword, and your wives shall be widows and your children fa- 
therless. 

25 If thou lend money to thy brother, who is near thee and in 
want ; thou shalt not be rigorous with him, nor charge him in- 

26 terest. And if thou hast taken the mantle of thy neighbour as 
a pledge, thou shalt restore it to him before the setting of the 

27 sun ; for it is his covering. This mantle is the only covering 
of his nakedness. In what can he sleep ? If therefore he cry to 
me, I will hear him ; for I am merciful. 

28 Thou shalt not revile gods, nor speak evil of the ruler of 
thy people. 

29 The first fruits of thy threshing floor and of thy press thou 
shalt not withhold. 

30 The first born of thy sons thou shalt give to me. Thou 
shalt do the same with thy calf, thy sheep and thy ass. Seven 
days it shall be with the dam and on the eighth day thou shalt 

31 dedicate it to me. You shall be men holy to me, and you shall 
not eat what is torn by wild beasts. You shall throw it to the 
dogs. 

XXIII. Thou shalt not countenance an idle report, nor con- 

2 spire with the unrighteous to be a false witness. Thou shalt not 
be with the majority in wickedness, nor join with the multi- 

3 tude to shut out justice. In passing judgment thou shalt not 

4 be influenced by compassion for the needy. If thou meet the 
ox of thy enemy or his ass going astray thou shalt turn it 

5 back and restore it to him. And if thou seest thine enemy's ass 
fallen under his burden thou shalt not pass it by, but shalt 
raise it up with its load. 

6 Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of a poor man in the 

7 trial of his cause. Thou shalt keep aloof from every thing 
unjust. An innocent and a righteous man thou shalt not slay ; 
nor shalt thou justify a wicked man for the sake of bribes. 

8 Bribes thou shalt not receive, for they blind the eyes of them 
who see, and pervert judgment. 



!-!-! XXIII. EXODUS. 

You shall not afflict a stranger, for you know the heart of a 
stranger ; for you were strangers in the land of Egypt. 

10 Six years thou shalt sow thy ground and gather in the pro- 

11 ducts thereof; but on the seventh thou shalt give it rest and 
let it lie fallow, that the poor of thy people may eat, and what 
they leave, let the wild beasts of the field eat. The same thou 

12 shalt do with thy vineyards and thy olives. Six days thou shalt 
do thy work ; but on the seventh there shall be a rest ; that thy 
ox and thy ass may rest : and that the son of thy handmaid and 
the stranger may repose. 

13 You shall keep all that I have said to you ; and make no 
mention of the name of strange gods, nor let it be heard out of 
your mouth. 

14 Three times a year you shall keep a festival to me — the fes- 

15 tival of unleavened bread you shall carefully observe. Seven 
days you shall eat unleavened bread, as I have commanded 
you, at the time fixed in the month of new things. For in that 

16 month thou didst come out of Egypt. Thou shalt not appear 
before me empty. Thou shalt also keep the festival of the in- 
gathering of the first fruits of thy labours employed in sowing 
thy field ; and the festival of completion at the end of the year, 

17 when thou hast gathered in thy labours from the field. Three 
times a year all thy males must appear before the Lord thy 
God ; for when I have driven out the nations from before thee 
I will enlarge thy borders. 

18 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven ; 
nor shall the fat of my festival remain till the morning. 

19 The dedications of the first products of thy land thou shalt 
bring to the house of the Lord thy God. 

20 Thou shalt not boil a kid in the milk of its dam. 

Now behold I send my angel before thy face, that he may 
guard thee in the way, and bring thee to the land, which I have 

21 prepared for thee. Take heed to thyself and hearken to him 
and disobey him not ; for he should not withdraw from you ; 

22 for my name is upon him. If you will hearken diligently to 
this voice of mine, and do whatever I command thee, and keep 
my covenant, you shall be to me a peculiar people above all 
the nations ; for the whole earth is mine, but you shall be to 
me a royal priesthood and a holy nation. These words you 

VOL. I. K 



!-!-! XXIV. EXODUS. 

shall deliver to the children of Israel — If you will hearken dili- 
gently to my voice, and do all that I command thee, I will be 
an enemy to thy enemies, and an adversary to thy adversaries ; 

23 For my angel shall go before thee as thy leader, and conduct thee 
to the Amorite and the Chettite and the Pherezite and the Cha- 
nanite and the Gergasite and the Evite and the Jebusite, and I will 

24 exterminate them. Thou shalt not worship their gods nor serve 
them. Thou shalt not do according to their works ; but destroy 
utterly and break in pieces their pillars and worship the Lord 

25 thy God. And I will bless thy bread and thy wine and thy 

26 water, and turn away sickness from you. There shall not be a 

27 man childless, nor a woman barren in thy land. The number 
of your days I will completely fulfil. And I will send terror be- 
fore thee and confound all the nations to which thou shalt go ; 

28 and cause all thy adversaries to flee before thee. And I will 
send hornets before thee, and thou shalt drive out the Amo- 
rites and the Evites and the Chananites and the Chettites from 

29 before thee. I will not drive them out in one year, lest the land 
become a waste and the wild beasts of the earth multiply against 

30 thee. By little and little I will drive them away from thee until 

31 thou art increased and canst possess the land. And I will es- 
tablish thy boundaries from the Ked sea to the sea of Philis- 
teim, and from the wilderness to the great river Euphrates, and 
deliver into your hands those who are settled in the land, or 

32 drive them out from before thee. Thou shalt not make a treaty 

33 with them and their gods, nor shall they dwell in thy land, lest 
they cause thee to sin against me. For if thou serve their gods, 
they will be to thee a stumbling block. 

XXIV. Then the Lord said to Moses, Come up to the Lord, 
thou and Aaron and Nadab and Abiud and seventy of the elders 

2 of Israel ; and let them at a distance worship the Lord ; and let 
Moses alone approach near to God. As for them they shall 
not approach near ; nor shall the people come up with them. 

3 So Moses came and told the people all the words of God 
and the rules of rectitude, and all the people with one voice 
answered and said, All the words which the Lord hath spoken 

4 we will perform and we will be obedient. Then Moses wrote 
down all the words of the Lord. And rising early next morn- 
ing Moses built an altar at the foot of the mount with twelve 



!-!-! XXV. EXODUS. 

5 stones for the twelve tribes of Israel ; and he sent out the young 
men of the children of Israel and they brought up whole burnt 
offerings and slew young bulls for a sacrifice of thanksgiving 

6 to the Lord. And Moses took half of the blood and poured 
it into bowls, and the other half of the blood he poured out 

7 against the altar. Then he took the book of the covenant and 
read it in the hearing of the people, and they said, All that the 

8 Lord hath spoken we will do and we will be obedient. There- 
upon Moses took the blood and scattered it towards the peo- 
ple and said, Behold the blood of the covenant which the Lord 

9 hath made with you touching all these words. Then Moses 
and Aaron and Xadab and Abiud and seventy of the senate of 

10 Israel went up ; and they saw the place where the God of Israel 
stood ; and what was under his feet was like a pavement of Sap- 
phire, and in clearness like the appearance of the firmament of 

11 heaven. And of these chosen men of Israel not one uttered a 
dissenting voice. 

12 Now when they had appeared in the presence of God and 
had eaten and drunk the Lord said to Moses, Come up to me 
on the mount and stay there and I will give thee the tables of 
stone, the law and the commandments which I have written to 

13 be promulgated to them. Thereupon Moses arose with Joshua 

14 his attendant and they went up to the mount of God — Having 
said to the elders, Remain quiet here till we return to you, 
and behold Aaron and Hur are with you, if any one hath 

15 a controversy with another let them go to them. Moses then 
went up with Joshua to the mount and the cloud covered the 

16 mount. And the glory of God descended on mount Sina and 
the cloud covered it six days ; and on the seventh day the Lord 

17 called to Moses out of the midst of the cloud. Now the appear- 
ance of the glory of the Lord was like fire blazing on the top 

18 of the mount in the view of the Israelites; and Moses went 
into the midst of the cloud and ascended the mount and re- 
mained there forty days and forty nights. 

XXV. And the Lord spake to Moses saying, Say to the chil- 

2 dren of Israel, Take offerings from all who may be willing. 

3 And these you shall take as dedications to me. And this is the 
offering which you shall receive from them ; gold and silver and 

4 brass, and blue and purple and scarlet yarn, and cotton thread, 



!-!-! XXV. EXODUS. 

5 and goats' hair, and rams' skins dyed red, and skins of a violet 

6 colour, and incorruptible wood, and oil for giving light, and 

7 spices for the anointing oil and for the compound incense, and 
sardine stones, and stones to be engraved for the ephod and the 

8 robe which cometh down to the feet. And thou shalt make a 

9 sanctuary for me and I will appear among you. And thou shalt 
make every thing for me according to what I show thee on this 
mount — according to the pattern of the tabernacle and the pat- 
tern of all its utensils, so shalt thou make them. 

10 Thou shalt make the Ark of the testimony of incorruptible 
wood — two cubits and a half, the length, and a cubit and a 

11 half, the breadth, and a cubit and a half, the height. And thou 
shalt overlay it with pure gold. Within and without thou shalt 
overlay it. And thou shalt make for it a rim of gold welked 

12 and waved around. And thou shalt beat out for it four rings 
of gold and fasten them to the four corners, two rings on one 

13 side and two rin^s on the other side. And thou shalt make 

14 staves of incorruptible wood and overlay them with gold. And 
thou shalt put the staves in the rings on the sides of the ark, 

15 that with them the ark may be carried. The staves shall re- 

16 main immoveably in the rings of the ark. And thou shalt de- 
posit in the ark the testimonies which I give thee. 

17 And thou shalt make a propitiatory — a lid of pure gold, two 
cubits and a half, the length ; and a cubit and a half, the breadth. 

18 And thou shalt make two cherubs of turned gold, and place them 

19 at the two sides of the propitiatory. They shall be made, one 
cherub at one side, and the other cherub at the other side of the 

20 propitiatory. Thou shalt make the two cherubs at the two sides ; 
and the cherubs shall have their wings stretched forth above 
and shall overshadow the propitiatory with their wings ; and 
their faces shall be towards each other. The faces of the che- 

21 rubs shall be towards the propitiatory. And thou shalt put the 
propitiatory upon the ark ; and into the ark thou shalt put the 

22 testimonies which I give thee. And there I will make myself 
known to thee and speak to thee from above the propitiatory, 
from between the two cherubs which are on the ark of the tes- 
timony, touching all that I give thee in charge to the children 
of Israel. 



CL XXVI. EXODUS. 

23 Thou shalt also make a golden table of pure gold ; two cu- 
bits long ; and one cubit broad ; and a cubit and a half high : 

24 And thou shalt make for it a rim of gold, welked and waved 

25 around : And thou shalt make for it a border of a hand breadth 
all around, and to the border thou shalt make a welked wave 

26 all around : And thou shalt make four rings of gold and fasten 
the four rings to the four sides of its feet under the border. 

27 And the rings shall be for places to hold the staves so that with 

28 them they may carry the table. And thou shalt make the staves 
of incorruptible wood and overlay them with pure gold, and 

29 with them the table shall be carried. And thou shalt make its 
plates and its incense vessels and its libation vessels and the 
cups with which thou shalt pour out libations, all of pure gold. 

30 And on this table thou shalt lay the loaves which are to be in 
my presence before me continually. 

31 Thou shalt make also a candlestick of pure gold. Thou 
shalt make it a turned work. Its shaft and its branches and the 
cups and the knobs and the lilly ornaments shall be of one piece. 

32 And from its sides there shall issue six branches ; three bran- 

33 ches of the candlestick from one side thereof, and three bran- 
ches of the candlestick from the other side, with three cups 
beaten out in form of almonds, and a knob and an ornament 
like a lilly on each branch ; and so on the six branches issuing 

34 from the candlestick : and on the shaft there shall be four cups 
beaten out in form of almonds, and for each branch, knobs and 

35 ornaments like lillies, of the same piece ; the knob under the 
first pair of branches issuing from it ; and a knob under the se- 
cond pair of branches issuing from it, and so under the third 
pair of branches issuing from the shaft ; and on the shaft four 

36 cups beaten out in form of almonds. Let the knobs and the 
branches be of one piece. The whole must be turned out of 

37 one piece of pure gold. And thou shalt make the seven lamps 
for it, and place the lamps so that they may give light in one 

38 row. And its snuffers and its snuff dishes thou shalt make of 

39 pure gold. All these utensils shall be a talent of pure gold. 

40 See that thou make them according to the pattern shewn thee 
on this mount. 

XXVI. Thou shalt make also the tabernacle with ten cur- 
tains made of cotton thread and blue and purple and scarlet 



!-!-! XXVI. EXODUS. 

yarn with cherubs. With the workmanship of a tapestry weav- 

2 er thou shalt make them. The length of one curtain shall be 

3 eight and twenty cubits and its breadth four cubits. All the 
curtains shall be of the same measure. And five curtains shall 
be joined together one to another and the other five curtains 

4 shall be joined together one to another. And thou shalt make 
for them loops of blue yarn on the border of the outer curtain 
on one side for the coupling ; and the same thou shalt do on 
the selvage of the outermost curtain of the other sheet for the 

5 second coupling. Fifty loops thou shalt make for the one cur- 
tain, and fifty loops thou shalt make on the selvage of the other 
curtain for joining them together. Being directly opposite one 

6 to another they will meet each other at each joining place. And 
thou shalt make fifty links of gold and fasten the curtains one 
to another with these links ; and it shall be one tabernacle. 

7 And thou shalt make a covering for the tabernacle of hair cloth. 

8 Thou shalt make eleven hair cloth curtains. The length of 
the first curtain shall be thirty cubits and the breadth four cu- 
bits. The eleven hair cloth curtains shall be of the same mea- 

9 sure. And thou shalt fasten five hair curtains together, and 
six hair curtains together. And thou shalt lap the sixth cur- 

10 tain over directly in front of the tabernacle. And thou shalt 
make fifty loops on the border of the first hair curtain which 
is in the middle over the junction ; and thou shalt make fifty 
loops on the border of the other hair curtain which is to be 

11 joined with it, and thou shalt make fifty links of brass, and 
fasten the links together by the loops and so couple the hair 

12 curtains that they may be one. And thou shalt put the over- 
plus of the hair curtains of the tabernacle underneath — the half 
of the hair curtain which remaineth, thou shalt fold in under- 
neath that being the surplusage of the hair curtains of the ta- 

13 bernacle. So thou shalt fold back, underneath the tabernacle, 
a cubit on one side and a cubit on the other from the length 
of the hair curtain more than that of the tabernacle. It shall 
compleatly infold both the sides of the tabernacle so as to co- 
ll: ver it. And thou shalt make a counter covering for the taber- 
nacle of rams' skins dyed red and an upper covering of skins 

15 dyed blue. Thou shalt also make pilasters for the tabernacle 

16 of incorruptible wood. Thou shalt make each pilaster ten cu- 



!-!-! XXYI. EXODUS. 

17 bits long and a cubit and a half broad with two rabbets to each 
pilaster to fit the pilasters one to another. In this manner thou 

18 shalt make all the pilasters of the tabernacle. And thou shalt 
make the pilasters for the tabernacle twenty pilasters for the 

19 north side ; and for these twenty pilasters thou shalt make forty 
bases of silver, two for each pilaster, for both the ends thereof : 

20 And for the other side towards the south, twenty pilasters 

21 with their forty bases of silver, two for each pilaster for both 

22 the ends thereof: and for the end of the tabernacle which is 

23 towards the west thou shalt make six pilasters ; and at the corn- 
ers of the tabernacle out of the hinder ends thou shalt make 
two pilasters and the side on the end shall be of the same piece 

24 and as wide as the other side — both sides shall be equal from 
the corner to the first joint. That thou mayst do this at both 

25 corners the corner pilasters must have equal sides. So there 
will be eight pilasters and their bases of silver sixteen, two for 

26 each pilaster for the two ends thereof. And thou shalt make 
bars of incorruptible wood — five for one range of pilasters on 

27 one side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the other range 

28 of pilasters on the other side of the tabernacle ; and five for the 
end of the tabernacle facing the west. And let the bar which 
is along the middle of the ranges of pilasters reach from one 

29 corner to the other. And thou shalt overlay the pilasters with 
gold. And thou shalt make rings of gold into which thou shalt 

30 put the bars ; and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold. And 
thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the pattern shewn 
thee on this mount. 

31 Thou shalt also make a veil of blue and purple and scarlet 

32 yarn and cotton thread. This thou shalt make a work in- 
woven with cherubs : and thou shalt hang it on four pillars of 
incorruptible wood overlaid with gold, the capitals of which are 

33 to be of gold and their four bases of silver. And having hung up 
the veil upon the pillars, thou shalt bring in there within the 

34 veil the ark of the testimony. And the veil shall make a divi- 
sion for you, between the Holy and the Holy of Holies. And with 
the veil thou shalt cover from view the ark of the testimony in 

35 the Holy of Holies. And thou shalt place the table without the 
veil, and the candlestick over against the table on the south 
side of the tabernacle, and the table thou shalt place on the 



!-!-! XXV1L EXODUS. 

36 north side of the tabernacle. And thou shalt make a draw 
curtain for the door of the tabernacle, of blue and purple and 
scarlet yarn and cotton thread, the work of an embroiderer; 

37 And for this veil thou shalt make five pillars and overlay them 
with gold and their capitals shall be of gold but thou shalt cast 
for them five bases of brass. 

XXVII. Thou shalt make also an Altar of incorruptible wood, 
five cubits long and five cubits broad. The Altar shall be 

2 square and the height of it shall be three cubits. And thou 
shalt make the horns at the four corners. The horns shall be 
a component part of it and thou shalt overlay them with brass. 

3 And thou shalt make a border for the Altar. And its cover 
and its pans and its flesh hooks and its fire hearth and all its 

4 utensils thou shalt make of brass. And thou shalt make for it 
a brass grate of net work; and for the grate thou shalt make 

5 four rings of brass under the four sides ; and thou shalt put 
them under the grate of the altar below (now the grate must 

6 be half way up the height of the altar.) And thou shalt make 
for the altar poles of incorruptible wood and overlay them 

7 with brass, and thou shalt put the poles into the rings; and 

8 let the poles be along the sides of the altar in carrying it. Hol- 
low, and of boards thou shalt make it. According to what is 
shewn thee on this mount so shalt thou make it. 

9 Thou shalt also make a court for the tabernacle. For the 
south side, the hangings of the court shall be of cotton thread ; 
the length for that side one hundred cubits and their pillars 

10 twenty. And the twenty bases of these pillars shall be of brass 

11 and their links and their fillets of silver. So for the north side 
there shall be hangings a hundred cubits long with their twen- 
ty pillars ; and the twenty bases of them shall be of brass, and 
the links and the fillets of these pillars and their bases shall be 

12 overlaid with silver. And for the breadth of the court west- 
ward there shall be hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten and 

13 their bases ten. And for the breadth of the court eastward 
there shall be hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten and 

14 their bases ten. But on one side of the gateway, the length of 
the hangings shall be fifteen cubits, their pillars three and their 

15 bases three ; and for the other side of the gateway, the length 
of the hangings shall be fifteen cubits ; their pillars three and 



!-!-! XXVIII. EXODUS. 

16 their bases three : and for the gate of the court there shall be 
a curtain of twenty cubits long, made of blue and purple and 
scarlet yarn and cotton thread woven with a variety of em- 

17 broidery ; the pillars four and their bases four. All the pil- 
lars of the court round about shall be filletted with silver and 

18 the capitals shall be silvered and their bases of brass. The 
length of the court shall be a hundred cubits on each side, and 
the breadth fifty cubits at each end, and the height of the cot- 

19 ton hangings five cubits. And the bases shall be of brass, 
and all the implements and all the utensils and all the pins of 
the court shall be of brass. 

20 Moreover thou shalt give orders to the children of Israel ; 
and let them provide for thee, clear, pure oil expressed from 
olives to burn for a light, that a lamp may be kept burning 

21 continually in the tabernacle of the testimony. On the outside 
of the veil which is before the covenant Aaron and his sons 
shall keep it burning from evening till morning before the 
Lord. This shall be an everlasting ordinance for your genera- 

XXVIII. tions among the children of Israel. Therefore asso- 
ciate thou with thyself thy brother Aaron and his sons, that 
from among the children of Israel, Aaron and Xadab and 
Abiud and Eleazar and Ithamar the sons of Aaron may minis- 

2 ter to me in the priest's office. And thou shalt make for thy 

3 brother Aaron holy raiment for dignity and glory. For this 
purpose speak to all those who are wise in heart, whom I have 
filled with a spirit of wisdom and understanding and let them 
make the holy raiment of Aaron for the sanctuary, in which 
he shall minister to me. 

4 Now these are the robes which they shall make, The breast 
plate, and the ephod, and a long robe reaching down to the 
feet, and a broidered vesture, and a mitre, and a girdle. And 
that they may make holy robes for Aaron and his sons to mi- 

5 nister to me, they shall take the gold and the blue and the pur_ 

6 pie and the scarlet yarn and the cotton thread, and they shall 

7 make the ephod of cotton thread, a woven work of an em- 
broiderer. It shall have two shoulder pieces connected with it 

8 and to one another, being joined at the two sides. And the 
texture of the two shoulder pieces which are over it shall be 
of the same fabrick and materials as it is ; of pure gold and of 

vol. i. s 



!-!-! XXVIII. EXODUS. 

\) blue iind purple aud scarlet yarn and cotton thread. And thou 
shalt take the two stones, smaragdine stones, and engrave upon 

10 them the names of the sons of Israel, six names on one stone 
and the other six names on the other stone ; according to their 

11 births. With the workmanship of a skilful engraver, like the 
engraving of a seal, thou shalt engrave the two stones with the 

12 names of the sons of Israel. And thou shalt fix these two stones 
on the shoulders of the ephod. They are stones of remem- 
brance for the children of Israel. And Aaron shall carry the 
names of the children of Israel before the Lord on his two 

13 shoulders as a memorial concerning them. Thou shalt also 
make little shields of pure gold ; and thou shalt make two 

14 pieces of net work of pure gold intermixed with flowers, the 
work of a curious plaiter, and thou shalt put the plaited net 
works upon the little shields in the fore front of the shoulder 

15 pieces. And thou shalt make the oracle of judgment, a work 
of an embroiderer— thou shalt make it, conformable to the 
ephod, of gold and blue and purple and scarlet yarn and cotton 

16 thread — thou shalt make it four square. It shall be double. 

17 The length of it a span and the breadth a span. And thou 
shalt inweave in it a texture to contain stones in four rows. 
One row of stones shall be a sardius, a topaz and a smaragdus ; 

18 this shall be the first row. And the second row, an anthrax, 

19 and a sapphire and a jaspis ; and the third row, a ligure, an 

20 agate and an amethyst ; and the fourth row, a chrysolite and a 
beryl and an onyx. They must be cased in gold, and bound 

21 together with gold according to their rows. And the stones 
from the names of the sons of Israel must be twelve accord- 
ing to their names. They must be engraved like seals every 

22 one with its name for the twelve tribes. And thou shalt make 
upon the oracle net works inwoven with it, a chain work of 

23 pure gold ; and thou shalt make for the oracle two rings of gold 
and thou shalt put the two rings of gold on the two upper ends 

24 of the oracle. And thou shalt put the nettings and chain works 
of gold on the two rings on the two upper ends of the oracle ; 

25 and the other two ends of the two pieces of net work thou 
shalt put on the two pieces of plaiters work, so as to put them 
upon the shoulders of the ephod over against each other in the 

6 fore front. And thou shalt make two rings of gold and put 



!-!-! XXVIII. EXODUS. 

them on the two wings of the oracle on the very tip next to the 

27 lowest hinder tip of the ephod : And thou shalt make two rings 
of gold and put them below on both the shoulder pieces of 
the ephod, over against the upper juncture of the contexture 

28 of the ephod ; And from the two rings which are on it thou 
shalt bind the oracle to the two rings of the ephod, which are 
fastened with blue yarn and plaited into the texture of the 

29 ephod, that the oracle may not be loosed from the ephod. And 
Aaron shall carry on his breast the names of the children of 
Israel on the oracle of judgment, when he goeth into the sanc- 

30 tuary, as a memorial before God. And upon the oracle of 
judgment thou shalt put the Manifestation and the Truth. And 
it shall be on the breast of Aaron, when he goeth into the 
sanctuary, before the Lord. And Aaron shall carry the judg- 
ments of the Israelites upon his breast before the Lord con- 

31 tinually. And thou shalt make a robe to be worn under this, 

32 which shall reach down to the feet, entirely of blue yarn : xVnd 
the opening of it at the neck shall be in the middle, having a 
hem round the opening, a woven work, the binding being in- 

33 terwoven with it, that it may not be rent. And underneath the 
lower border of this robe thou shalt make clusters as of a 
blooming pomegranate of blue and purple and scarlet yarn and 
cotton thread. Under the border of this robe round about thou 
shalt make clusters all of the same appearance and golden bells 

34 between them round about— by a cluster a golden bell with 

35 a running branch on the border of the robe round about ; so 
that when Aaron officiateth the sound of him may be heard 
as he goeth into the sanctuary before the Lord, or cometh out, 
that he may not die. 

36 And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and engrave on 

37 it with the engraving of a seal, Holiness to the Lord, and thou 

38 shalt fix it on a blue lace ; and it shall be upon the mitre. It 
shall be upon the front of the mitre and upon Aaron's fore- 
head ; and Aaron shall bear away the sins of the holy things 
which the children of Israel may dedicate — of every gift of 
their holy things. And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead con- 

39 tinually to make them acceptable before the Lord. Now the 
embroideries of the vestures shall be of cotton and thou shalt 
make a tiara of cotton, and thou shalt make a girdle, the work 



Cb. XXIX. EXODUS. 

40 of an embroiderer. And for Aaron's sons tbou sbalt make ves- 
tures and girdles. Tbou sbalt also make tiaras for tbem for 

41 dignity and glory. And with tbese tbou sbalt clotbe Aaron 
thy brotber and bis sons witb bim. And tbou sbalt anoint tbem 
and fill tbeir bands and consecrate them that they may minis- 

42 ter to me in the priest's office. Moreover tbou sbalt make for 
tbem linen drawers to cover tbeir nakedness. Tbese shall reach 

43 from the loins to the thighs, and Aaron and his sons shall wear 
them when they come into the tabernacle of the testimony or 
when they come near to minister at the altar of the sanctuary, 
that they may not bring sin upon themselves and die. This 
shall be a perpetual statute for bim and bis seed after bim. 

XXIX. Now these are the things which thou sbalt do for them. 
Tbou sbalt consecrate tbem that they may minister to me in 

2 the priest's office. For this purpose thou sbalt take one young 
bull of the herd and two rams without blemish and unleaven- 
ed bread tempered witb oil and unleavened cakes anointed 

3 witb oil. These tbou sbalt make of fine wbeaten flour and put 
them in one basket, and bring them in tbe basket, witb the 

4 young bull and tbe two rams. Then tbou sbalt bring Aaron 
and bis sons to the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony 

5 and wash them with water. Then taking the robes tbou sbalt 
put on Aaron thy brotber tbe robe reaching down to the feet, 
and the epbod, and tbe oracle ; and tbou shalt fasten for bim 

6 the oracle to the epbod. Then thou shalt put the mitre on his 

7 head and fasten tbe plate Holiness to the mitre. And thou shalt 
take some of the anointing oil and pour it on bis head and 

8 anoint bim. Then thou shalt bring his sons near, and clotbe 
tbem witb vestures and gird tbem witb girdles and put the 

9 tiaras on tbem. And the office of serving me as priests shall be 
theirs for ever. Then tbou shalt consecrate tbe bands of 

10 Aaron, and tbe bands of his sons— for this purpose thou shalt 
bring the young bull to tbe doors of tbe tabernacle of tbe testi- 
mony and Aaron and his sons shall lay tbeir bands on the 
head of the young bull before the Lord at the doors of the ta- 
ll bernacle of the testimony. Then thou shalt slay the bull be- 
fore tbe Lord at the doors of the tabernacle of tbe testimony, 
12 and tbou sbalt take some of the blood of the bull and put it on 
the horns of the altar witb thy finger ; and all the rest of the 



!-!-! XXIX. EXODUS. 

13 blood thou shalt pour out at the base of the altar. And thou 
shalt take the whole caul which covereth the belly and the 
lobe of the liver and the two kidneys with the suet on them ; 

14 and lay them on the altar : but the flesh of the bull and the hide 
and the excrements thou shalt burn with fire without the camp : 

15 for it is a sin offering. Then thou shalt take one ram and 
Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the ram ; 

16 and thou shalt slay it ; and taking the blood thou shalt pour it 

17 around the altar. Then thou shalt cut the ram in pieces accord- 
ing to its members and thou shalt wash the entrails and the feet 

18 with water and lay them on the pieces with the head, and thou 
shalt carry up this whole ram on the altar for a whole burnt offer- 

19 ing to the Lord, for a sweet savour. It is a burnt offering to the 
Lord. Then thou shalt take the other ram, and Aaron and his 
sons shall lay their hands on the head of this ram; and thou 

20 shalt kill it ; and thou shalt take some of its blood and put it 
upon the tip of Aaron's right ear, and on the thumb of his 
right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot ; and on the 
tip of the right ears of his sons, and on the thumbs of their right 

21 hands, and on the great toes of their right feet : and thou shalt 
take some of the blood from the altar, and some of the anoint- 
ing oil and sprinkle it upon Aaron and his raiment, and upon 
his sons and their raiment. So shall he and his raiment be hal- 
lowed ; and his sons and their raiment with him. But the blood 

22 of this ram thou shalt pour against the altar round about. And 
thou shalt take from this ram the fat tail, and the caul which 
covereth the belly, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kid- 
neys with the suet on them, and the right shoulder (for this is a 

23 consecration offering) and one loaf of oil bread, and one cake 
out of the basket of unleavened cakes which were laid before 

24 the Lord ; and thou shalt lay all these upon the hands of Aaron, 
and upon the hands of his sons, and set them apart as a dedi- 

25 cation before the Lord. Then thou shalt take them out of their 
hands and carry them up, upon the altar of burnt offerings for a 
smell of fragrance before the Lord. It is an homage offering to 

26 the Lord. And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron's 
consecration and set it apart as a dedication before the Lord, 

27 and thou shalt have it for a portion. And thou shalt hallow this 
breast dedication and the shoulder dedication which was set 



!-!-! XXIX. EXODUS. 

apart and taken from the ram of consecration on account of 

28 Aaron and his sons ; and they shall belong to Aaron and his 
sons by an everlasting statute from the Israelites. For this is a 
dedication and it shall be a portion taken from the Israelites, 
from the burnt offerings of thanksgiving of the children of Is- 
rael — a portion set apart for the Lord. 

29 Now the sanctuary robes which are appropriate to Aaron 
shall be for his sons after him to be anointed in them and to 

30 consecrate their hands. The priest — that one of his sons who 
is to succeed him and come into the tabernacle of the tes- 
timony to minister in the Holies shall put them on seven days. 

?A And thou shalt take the flesh of the ram of consecration 

32 and boil this flesh in a holy place ; and Aaron and his sons 
shall eat the flesh of this ram and the bread which is in the bas- 

33 ket. At the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony they shall 
eat those meats, with which they were hallowed to consecrate 

34 their hands with them, to hallow themselves. None of another 
family shall eat of them, for they are holy. And if any of the 
flesh of the consecration sacrifice or of the bread be left till 
the morning, thou shalt burn what remaineth with fire. It shall 
not be eaten ; for it is a dedication. 

35 Having done thus for Aaron and his sons according to all 

36 that I have commanded thee, and consecrated their hands seven 
days, thou shalt offer on the day of the purification a young 
bull for a sin offering, and thou shalt purify the altar, when thou 

37 consecratest upon it, and anoint it so as to hallow it. Seven 
days thou shalt purify the altar and hallow it, so shall the altar 

38 be most holy. Whoever toucheth it shall be hallowed. Now 
these are what thou shalt offer on the altar — two yearling 
lambs without blemish every day on the altar continually, an 

39 offering of homage without intermission ; the one lamb thou 

40 shalt offer in the morning with a tenth of fine flour tempered 
with a quarter of a hin of expressed oil ; and for a libation a 

41 quarter of a hin of wine for the first lamb : and the other 
lamb thou shalt offer in the evening with the same cake offer - 

42 ing and the same libation as in the morning. For a smell of 
fragrance — as an offerino- of homage to the Lord thou shalt 
offer this continual sacrifice throughout your generations, at 
the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony before the Lord in 



Cli. XXX. EXODUS. 

the places where I shall make myself known to thee so as to 

43 speak to thee. And there I will issue orders to the children of 

44 Israel and be hallowed by my glory. And I will hallow the ta- 
bernacle of the testimony and the altar ; and I will hallow 
Aaron and his sons to minister to me in the priest's office ; 

45 and I will be invoked by the children of Israel and will be 

46 their God. And they shall know that I am the Lord their God 
who brought them out of Egypt to be invoked by them and 
to be their God. 

XXX. Thou shalt also make an Altar to burn incense thereon. 

2 Of incorruptible wood thou shalt make it a cubit long and a 
cubit broad. It shall be square and the height shall be two 

3 cubits. The horns shall be a component part of it. And thou . 
shalt overlay with pure gold its grate and its sides round about 
and the horns thereof. And thou shall make for it a wreathed 

4 border of gold round about. And thou shalt make two rings 
of pure gold under its wreathed border for the two corners. 
Thou shalt make them on the two sides and there shall be 

5 clasps for the staves with which it is to be carried. And thou 
shalt make staves of incorruptible wood and overlay them with 

6 gold. And thou shalt place this before the veil, which is over 
the ark of the testimonies, from which I will make myself 

7 known to thee. And Aaron shall burn thereon every morning 
compound incense beaten fine. When he replenisheth the 

8 lamps he shall burn incense thereon. And when Aaron light- 
eth the lamps in the evening he shall burn incense thereon 
every day continually before the Lord throughout their gene- 

9 rations. And upon it thou shalt not offer any other incense offer- 
ing, homage offering, nor cake offering; nor shalt thou pour 

10 a libation thereon. But Aaron shall make an atonement on 
it — on the horns thereof, once a year. With the blood of the 
purifying sacrifice he shall purify it throughout their genera- 
tions. It is a Holy of Holies to the Lord. 

11 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses saying, When thou 

12 takest an account of the children of Israel, on being reviewed 
they shall give every man a ransom for his life to the Lord, 
so there shall be no destruction among them by the review 

13 made of them. And this is what every one who passeth re- 
view shall give, the half of a didrachm, which is according to 



!-!-! XXX. EXODUS. 

the holy didrachm, twenty oboli making a didrachrn. And this 

II half of a didrachm shall be an offering to the Lord. Every one 
who passeth the review from twenty years old and upwards 

15 shall give this offering to the Lord. He who is rich shall add 
nothing to it, and he who is poor shall deduct nothing from the 
half of a didrachm when you give this offering to the Lord to 

10 make atonement for your lives. And thou shalt take the money 
of this offering from the children of Israel and apply it to the 
service of the tabernacle of the testimony. And it shall be a 
memorial before the Lord to make atonement for your lives. 

17 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Make a laver 
of brass with its base of brass for the purpose of washing. 

IS And thou shalt place it between the tabernacle of the testi- 

19 mony and the altar, and thou shalt pour water into it. And 
out of it Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their 

20 feet with water. When they go into the tabernacle of the testi- 
mony, they shall wash with water. That they may escape death, 
when they go to the altar to minister as priests and to carry up 
the whole burnt offerings to the Lord they shall wash their 

21 hands and their feet with water; and when they go into the 
tabernacle of the testimony they shall wash with water that 
they may not die : and this shall be to them a perpetual ordi- 
nance — to him and his posterity after him. 

22 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Thou thyself 

23 shalt take spices — the flower of choice myrrh five hundred 
shekels : and sweet scented cinnamon half as much — two hun- 

24 dred and fifty shekels ; and sweet scented calamus two hun- 
dred and fifty shekels ; and of iris five hundred shekels, sanc- 

25 tuary weight ; and olive oil a hin ; and of these thou shalt 
make an holy ointment, an odoriferous perfume, compounded 

26 by the art of an apothecary. It shall be a holy anointing oil 
and with it thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the testimony 

27 and the ark of the tabernacle of the testimony and all the uten- 

28 sils thereof, and the candlestick and all the utensils belonging 
to it ; and the altar of incense ; and the altar of whole burnt 
offerings and all its utensils ; and the table and all its utensils 

29 and the laver. And thou shalt hallow them, and they shall be 

30 holy of holies. Every one who toucheth them shall be hallow- 
ed. And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons and hallow 



!-!-! XXXI. EXODUS. 

31 them to minister to me as priests. And thon shalt speak to 
the children of Israel and say, This shall be to yon a holy 

3:2 anointing oil throughout your generations. Upon the flesh of 
man it must not be poured ; nor shall you make any for your- 

33 selves according to this composition. It shall be holy, and held 
in veneration by you. Whoever shall make any like it or give 
any of it to a stranger, shall be rooted out from among his 
people. 

34 Moreover the Lord said to Moses, Take thee spices — 
stacte, onycha and sweet scented chalbanum and pellucid 

35 frankincense, of each an equal quantity. And of these they 
shall make compound incense mixed up by the art of an apo- 

30 thecary, a pure holy composition. And thou shalt beat some 
of it fine, and lay it over against the testimonies in the taber- 
nacle of the testimony, where I shall make myself known to 

37 thee. It shall be to you a most holy incense. According to the 
composition thereof you shall not make any for yourselves. 

38 You shall consider it as a holy thing appropriate to the Lord. 
Whoever shall make any like it to yield a fragrance for him- 
self shall be rooted out from among his people. 

XXXI. Then the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Behold I have 

2 called by name, Beseleel the son of Ourius, the son of Hur, 

3 of the tribe of Judas, and filled him with a divine spirit of wis- 
dom and understanding and knowledge in every kind of 

1 workmanship, to contrive and execute as a master carpenter; 

and to manufacture gold and silver and brass, and blue and 
5 purple and scarlet yarn ; and to cut stones ; and in works of 

architecture made of wood to execute all kinds of workman- 
() ship. Him I have given with Eliab the son of Achisamach of 

the tribe of Dan. And to every man of an understanding heart 

I have given wisdom and they will make all that I have com- 

7 manded thee — the tabernacle of the testimony, and the ark of 

8 the covenant, and the propitiatory upon it, and the furniture 
of the tabernacle, and the altars, and the table and all the uten- 
sils thereof, and the pure candlestick and all its utensils, and 

9 the laver with its base, and the sacerdotal robes of Aaron, and 

10 the robes of his sons to minister to me in the priest's office, 

11 and the anointing oil and the compound incense of the sanctu- 
ary. According to all that I have commanded thee they will do. 

vol. I. T 



!-!-! XXXII. EXODUS. 

12 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Charge the 

13 children of Israel saying, See that you keep my sabbaths. It 
is a sign between me and you throughout your generations, 
that you may know that I am the Lord who sanctifieth you ; 

14 therefore you shall keep the sabbath, because it is holy to 
the Lord for you. He who profaneth it shall surely be put to 
death. Whoever shall do any work on it, that person shall be 

15 rooted out from among his people. Six days thou shalt per- 
form works, but on the seventh day are the sabbaths, a rest holy 
to the Lord. Whoever shall do any work on the seventh day 

16 shall be put to death. Therefore the children of Israel shall 
keep the sabbaths and cause them to be kept throughout their 

17 generations. It is au everlasting covenant between me and the 
children of Israel. It is for me a perpetual sign that in six days 
the Lord made the heaven and the earth and rested on the 
seventh. 

18 Here he paused, and gave Moses, when he had ceased 
speaking to him on mount Sina, two tables of the testimony — 
tables of stone written with the finger of God. 

XXXII. (Now when the people saw that Moses delayed to 
come down from the mount, they rose up together against Aa- 
ron and said to him ; Arise and make for us gods who shall 
go before us ; for as for this Moses, the man who brought us 
out from the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of 

2 him. Thereupon Aaron said to them, Take off the golden ear- 
rings which are in the ears of your wives and daughters and 

3 bring them to me. So all the people took off the gold ear-rings 
which were in their ears and brought them to Aaron ; and he 

5 received them at their hands and having made of them a mol- 
ten bull he fashioned it with a graving tool and said, These 
are thy gods Israel, who brought thee up out of the land of 

5 Egypt. And when Aaron saw it he built an altar before it. 
And Aaron made proclamation, saying, To-morrow is the fes- 

6 tival of the Lord. So rising early in the morning he caused 
whole burnt offerings to be brought up, and offered a sacrifice 
of thanksgiving ; and the people sat down to eat and drink and 
rose up to play.) 

7 Then the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Go quickly, go 
down from this place ; for thy people whom thou hast brought 



!-!-! XXXII. EXODUS. 

8 out of the land of Egypt have transgressed. They have quickly 
turned aside out of the way in which thou commandedst them 
to walk and have made for themselves a young bull and wor- 

9 shipped it ; and have sacrificed to it and said, These are thy 
gods, Israel, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt. 

10 Now therefore let me alone, that being provoked to wrath 
against them I may utterly destroy them, and I will make thee 
a great nation. 

11 Upon which Moses made supplication before the Lord 
God and said, Shouldst thou, Lord, be provoked to wrath 
against thy people, whom thou hast brought out of the land ot 
Egypt with great power and with thine uplifted arm, perhaps 

12 the Egyptians may speak, saying, With an ill intent he led 
them out to slay them on the mountains and utterly consume 
them from the earth. Stay thy fierce indignation and be mer- 

13 ciful at this wickedness of thy people, remembering Abraham 
and Isaak and Jacob thy servants, to whom thou didst swear 
by thyself and didst speak saying, I will greatly multiply your 
seed like the stars of heaven for multitude ; and didst say that thou 
wouldst give them all that land, that they should possess it for 

14 ever. And when the Lord was moved with compassion to save 

15 his people, Moses turned and went down from the mount with 
10 the two tables of the testimony in his hands. Xow the tables 

were of stone written on both sides. On the one side and on the 
other they were written, and the tables were the work of God. 
And the writing was the writing of God engraved on the ta- 
ll bles. And Joshua hearing the sound of the people shouting 

18 said to Moses, There is a sound of war in the camp. To 
which he replied, It is not the sound of men singing alternately 
as they rush to battle, nor is it the sound of men answering 
each other on a retreat, but the sound of responsive strains at 

19 a revel, which I hear. And when he approached the camp and 
saw the young bull and the choirs, Moses being inflamed with 
wrath threw the two tables from his hands and broke them at 

20 the foot of the mount. And taking the bull which they had 
made he burned it with fire and grinded it fine and strewed 

21 it in the water and made the Israelites drink it. And Moses 
said to Aaron, What did this people do to thee, that thou hast 

22 brought upon them this great sin ? Upon which Aaron said to 



!-!-! XXXIII. EXODUS. 

Moses, Be not angry, my lord, for thou knowest the irupetu- 

23 ousness of this people. For they said to me, Make us gods 
which shall go before us, for as for this Moses, the man who 
brought us out of Egypt we know not what is become of him. 

24 Whereupon I said to them, If any one hath golden ornaments 
take them off. So they gave me and I cast into the fire, and 
out came that bull. 

25 And when Moses saw that the people were scattered abroad ; 
for Aaron had scattered and made them a derision to their ene- 

26 mies, Moses stood at the gate of the camp and said, Who is 

27 for the Lord ? Let him come to me. Upon which all the sons 
of Levi joined him. Then Moses said to them, Thus saith the 
Lord the God of Israel, Gird ye every man his sword on his 
thigh and pass through and wheel about from gate to gate 
through the camp and slay every man his brother and every 
man his neighbour and every one him who is nearest of kin 

28 to him. And the children of Levi did as Moses spoke to them 
and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men. 

29 For Moses said to them, Fill your hands to-day for the Lord, 
every one with his son or with his brother that a blessing may 
be bestowed on you. 

30 And on the following day Moses said to the people, You 
have committed a great sin, now therefore I will go up to God 

31 that I may appease him for this sin of yours. So Moses went 
back to the Lord and said, Lord ! this people have commit- 
ted a great sin and have made for themselves gods of gold. 

32 Now therefore, if thou indeed forgivest this their sin, forgive 
it : but if not : blot me out of thy book which thou hast writ- 

33 ten. And the Lord said to Moses, Whoever have sinned be- 

34 fore me, them will I blot out of my book. Now therefore go 
thy way ; go down and lead this people to the place which I 
commanded thee. Behold my angel will go before thee but 
on the day when I visit I will bring upon them this sin of 
theirs. 

35 Now when the Lord had smitten the people for making the 
XXXIII. bull which Aaron had made, the Lord said to Moses, 

Depart, go up hence thou and thy people whom thou hast led 
out of the land of Egypt, to the land which with an oath I 
promised to Abraham and Isaak and Jacob, saying, To your 



Oh. XXXIII. EXODUS. 

2 seed I will give it. And I will send my angel before thee 
and he will drive out the Amorite and the Chettite and the 
Pherezite and the Gergasite and the Evite and the Jebusite 

3 and the Chananite. And I will bring thee to a land flowing 
with milk and honey : for I must not go with thee because 
thou art a stiff necked people, lest I destroy thee in the way. 

4 And when the people heard these evil tidings they mourned 

5 bitterly. Whereupon the Lord said to the Israelites, You are 
a stiff necked people, take care that I bring not another stroke 
on you and utterly consume you. Now therefore strip off the 
robes of your glory and your ornaments and I will shew thee 

(5 what I will do to thee. So the Israelites stript off their orna- 
ments and took down the barrier from the mountain Chore!) 
and Moses struck his tent and pitched it without the camp at 

7 a distance from the camp, (Now it was called the tabernacle 
of the testimony, and every one who sought the Lord 

8 went out to this tabernacle without the camp. And as Moses 
was going to the tabernacle without the camp, all the people 
stood looking, every one at his tent door, and kept their eyes 
upon Moses as he was going until he entered the tabernacle) 

9 And when Moses entered the tabernacle, the pillar of cloud 
descended and stood at the door of the tabernacle and talked 

10 with Moses. And when all the people saw the pillar of cloud 
standing at the door of the tabernacle all the people as they 

11 were standing worshipped every one at his tent door. And 
when the Lord had talked with Moses face to face as one 
would talk to his friend, Moses returned to the camp, but his 
attendant Joshua the son of Nave being young did not go out 
of the tabernacle. 

L2 Now Moses had said to the Lord, Behold thou sayest, 
Lead on this people, but hast not let me know whom thou 
wilt send with me. Yet thou hast said to me, I know thee 

13 above all men and thou art in favour with me. If therefore I 
have found favour in thy sight manifest thyself to me in an 
evident manner, that I may see thee in what way soever I may 
have found favour in thy sight, and that I may know that this 

14 great nation is thy people. And he said, Must I myself go be- 

15 fore thee and give thee rest ? To which Moses replied, Unless 
thou thyself accompany us, take me not away from this place : 



!-!-! XX XIV. EXODUS. 

16 for how can it be known for certain that I and this people 
have found favour in thy sight, but by thy going with us ? or 
I and this people be glorious above all that are on the earth ? 

17 Then the Lord said to Moses, Even this which thou hast said, 
I will do for thee ; for thou hast found favour in my sight and 

18 I know thee above all men. Upon which Moses said, Mani- 

19 fest thyself to me. And he said, I will go before thee with my 
glory and I will call by my name The Lord, before thee ; and 
I will have mercy on whom I please to have mercy ; and I will 
have compassion on whomsoever I compassionate ; but, said 

20 he, thou canst not see my face ; for no man can see my face 

21 and live. Then the Lord said, Behold there is a place near me. 
Thou shalt stand upon the rock, and when my glory is passing 

22 by, I will place thee in a cleft of the rock and cover thee with 

23 my hand over thee, until I pass by, then I will withdraw my 
hand and then thou shalt see what are behind me but my face 
cannot be seen by thee. 

XXXIY. Then the Lord said to Moses, Hew thee two tables 
of stone like the first and come up to me on the mount, and I 
will write on those tables the words which were in the first 

2 tables which thou didst break ; and be ready against the morning 
and thou shalt come up to mount Sina, and wait for me there 

3 on the top of the mount, but let none come up with thee nor 
be seen in all the mountain ; and let neither flocks nor herds 

4 pasture near the mount. So when Moses had hewn two tables 
of stone such as the first he arose early in the morning and 

5 went up mount Sina, as the Lord had commanded him. And 
Moses took the two tables of stone and the Lord descended in 
a cloud and stood by him there and called in the name of the 

6 Lord. And the Lord passed by before him and proclaimed, 
The Lord, the God compassionate and merciful, long suffering and 

7 abundant in goodness and truth, keeping kindness and mercy for 
thousands, taking away transgressions, iniquities and sins, will by 
no means clear the guilty, when he bringeth the transgressions 
of fathers on children and children s children to the third and 

8 fourth generation. Upon which Moses made haste and having 

bowed down on the ground he worshipped and said, If I have 

9 found favour in thy sight ; let my Lord go with us : for this 
people is stiff necked, and thou wilt take away our sins and our 



!-!-! XXXIV. EXODUS. 

10 iniquities and we shall be for thee. And the Lord said to Mo- 
ses, Behold I make a covenant with thee, Before all thy people 
I will do marvellous things such as have not been done in all 
the earth nor in any nation. And all the people among whom 
thou art shall see the works of the Lord, that those which I shall 

11 do for thee are marvellous. Attend thou to all that I command 
thee. Behold I drive out before you the Amorite and the 
Chananite and the Pherezite and the Chettite and the Evite 

12 and the Gergasite and the Jebusite : Take thou heed to thyself 
that thou make not a covenant with the inhabitants of the land 
to which thou art going, lest it become a stumbling block to 

13 you. Their altars you shall demolish : their pillars you shall 
break to pieces ; and their groves you shall cut down ; and the 

14 graven images of their gods you shall burn with fire. For 
you must not worship other gods ; for the Lord God, a zealous 

15 name, is a zealous God. Peradventure, shouldst thou make 
a covenant with those settled in that land, when they go a 
whoring after their gods and sacrifice to their gods and invite 

16 thee thou mayst eat with them ; and shouldst thou take their 
daughters for thy sons and give some of thy daughters to their 
sons, thy daughters may go a whoring after their gods and 

17 thy sons may go a whoring after their gods. Thou shalt not 

18 make for thyself molten gods. The festival of unleavened 
bread thou shalt keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened 
bread as I commanded thee at the set time in the month of 
new things ; for in the month of new things thou didst come 

19 out of Egypt. With regard to every firstling, the males are 

20 mine — every firstling of kine and sheep ; but the firstling of 
an ass thou shalt redeem with a sheep ; and if thou wilt not 
redeem it with that thou shalt pay the worth of it. Every first 

21 born of thy sons thou shalt redeem. Thou shalt not appear 
before me empty. Six days perform works, but on the se- 
venth thou shalt rest. In seeding time and harvest it shall be 

22 a rest. The festival of weeks thou shalt celebrate for me at 
the beginning of the reaping of wheat ; and the festival of the 

2o ingathering in the middle of the year. Three times a year all 
thy males shall appear before the Lord the God of Israel. 

24 For when I shall have driven out the nations from before thee 
and enlarged thy borders, none shall covet thy land, when 



!-!-! XXXV. EXODUS. 

thou comest up to appear before the Lord thy God three 

25 times a year. Thou shalt not offer the blood of my burnt of- 
ferings with leaven, nor shall the victims of the passover fes- 

26 tival remain till the morning. The first fruits of thy land thou 
shalt lay by for the house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt 
not boil a lamb in the milk of its dam. 

27 Then the Lord said to Moses, Write for thyself these 
words ; for on these terms I have made a covenant with thee 
and Israel. 

28 And Moses was there before the Lord forty days and forty 
nights. He did not eat bread nor drink water. And he wrote 
on the tables the words of the covenant — the ten coram and - 

29 ments. And when Moses came down from the mount with 
the two tables in his hands, he did not know, while he was 
coming down from the mount, that the skin of his face had 

30 been irradiated with glory by his talking with him ; but when 
Aaron and all the elders of Israel saw Moses, and that the 
skin of his face was irradiated with glory, they were afraid to 

31 approach him. Whereupon Moses called them ; and Aaron 
and all the chiefs of the congregation turned to him and Moses 

32 spoke to them. And after that all the sons of Israel came to 
him ; and he enjoined upon them all that the Lord had given 

33 him in charge on mount Sina. And when he had clone speak - 

34 ing to them he put a veil on his face. But when Moses went 
in before the Lord to speak to him he took off the veil until he 

35 came out, and when he came out and rehearsed to all the chil- 
dren of Israel what the Lord commanded him (as the children 
of Israel saw that Moses' face was irradiated with glory there- 
fore) Moses put the veil on his face until he should go in to 
speak to him. 

XXXV. Then Moses assembled all the congregation of the 

2 Israelites and said, These are the things which the Lord said 
you shall do. Six days thou shalt perform works ; but on the 
seventh there shall be a rest, holy sabbaths, a rest to the Lord ; 

3 whoever doth work on it let him be put to death. You shall 
not kindle a fire in any of your habitations on the sabbath day. 

4 I am the Lord. Again Moses spoke to all the congregation of 
the Israelites and said, This is the thing which the Lord hath 

5 commanded saying, Take from yourselves an offering for the 



!-!-! XXXV. EXODUS. 

Lord. Let every one whose heart is so disposed bring these 

6 offerings to the Lord, gold, silver, brass, bine, purple and 

7 scarlet yarn doubled ; and cotton thread and goats' hair and 

8 rams' skins dyed red and skins dyed blue and incorruptible 

9 wood and sardine stones and stones to be engraved for the 

10 ephod and the long robe ; and let every wise hearted man among 
you come and make all the works which the Lord hath con- 

11 manded — the tabernacle, and the coverings, and upper cover- 

12 ings and the hangings, and the bars and the pilasters, and the 
ark of the testimony with its staves and its propitiatory, and 
the veil and the hangings of the court with its pillars, and the 
smaragdine stones and the incense and the anointing oil and 
the table with all its utensils, and the candlestick for light with 
all its utensils, and the altar with all its utensils, and the holy 

19 garments of Aaron the priest, and the robes and the sacerdotal 
vestures for the sons of Aaron in which they are to minister 
and the anointing oil and the compound incense. 

20 Thereupon all the congregation of the children of Israel 
went out from Moses and all whose heart prompted them and 
all to whom it seemed good in their mind brought every one 

21 an offering. And when they had brought an offering to the 
Lord for all the works of the tabernacle of the testimony, and 

22 for all its appurtenances, and for all the holy garments, then the 
men brought from their wives — every one as it seemed good 
brought seals and pendants and rings and necklaces and brace- 

23 lets and all sorts of jewels of gold. And when they had all 
brought their offerings of gold to the Lord, then every one who 
had cotton or skins of blue or rams' skins dyed red brought 

24 them ; And every one who had made a dedication of silver or 
brass brought them as offerings to the Lord; and they who 

25 had incorruptible timber did the same. And when they had 
brought materials for all the works of the service, then every 
woman skilled in spinning brought blue and purple and scar 

2b' let and cotton thread ; and all the women who had understand- 

27 ing and skill spun the goats' hair. And the chiefs brought the 
smaragdine stones and the stones to be set in the ephod and the 

28 oracle, and the materials both for the anointing oil and the com- 
pound incense. 

vol. i. u 



!-!-! XXXVI. EXODUS. 

29 And when all the Israelites, men and women, whose un- 
derstanding prompted them to promote all the works which the 
Lord had by Moses commanded them to make, had brought 

30 an offering to the Lord, then Moses said to the children of Is- 
rael, Behold God hath called by name Beseleel the son of 

31 Ourius the son of Hur of the tribe of Jnclas and filled him with 
a divine spirit of wisdom and understanding and skill in all 

32 things to execute all works of architecture and to work up 

33 o-old an d silver and brass and to cut stones and to model wood 

34 and to perform every kind of curious workmanship. He hath 
indeed qualified him and Eliab the son of Achisamach of the 

35 tribe of Dan and hath filled them with wisdom, knowledge 
and skill to know how to make all the works of the sanctuary, 
and to weave the embroidery and tapestry with scarlet yarn 
and cotton thread — to execute every kind of work in archi- 
tecture and embroidery. 

XXXVI. Accordingly Beseleel and Eliab and every man 
skilled in arts, to whom had been given wisdom and under- 
standing to know how to execute every kind of work suitable 
for the holy service, performed it according to all that the 

2 Lord had commanded. When Moses called Beseleel and 
Eliab and all who had skill— every one in whose heart Grod 
had put knowledge and all who were freely willing to come to 

3 the work so as to finish it compleatly, they received from Mo- 
ses all the offerings which the Israelites had brought for mak- 
ing all the works of the sanctuary. They received also the offer- 
ings from those who still continued to bring them in, every 

4 morning. And all the artists who did the works of the sanc- 
tuary attended diligently every one at the work in which he was 

5 engaged. And when Moses was told that the people were 
bringing in more than sufficient for all the works which the 

6 Lord had ordered to be made, Moses issued orders and caused 
proclamation to be made throughout the camp saying, Let nei- 
ther man nor woman make any more work for the offerings 

7 of the sanctuary. So the people were restrained from bringing 
any more ; for the materials which they had were sufficient for 
all the work to be done ; and there was an overplus. 

8 Xow the most skilful among the workmen made the holy 
garments, which are appropriate to Aaron the priest as the Lord 



!-!-! XXXVI. EXODUS. 

commanded Moses. They made the ephod of gold and of blue 
and purple and scarlet yarn and cotton thread, the thin plates 
of £rold being: cut into fine threads so as to be inwoven with 
the blue and purple and with the scarlet yarn and cotton thread. 
They made it a woven work, the shoulder pieces having from 
both the sides a work woven one piece into another alternately, 
each convoluted through itself out of itself. They made it ac- 
cording to its peculiar fabrick of gold and blue and purple and 
scarlet yarn and cotton thread as the Lord commanded Moses. 
And they worked the two smaragdine stones fastened with it 
and set in gold, which were excavated and engraven, like the 
engraving of a seal, with the names of the sons of Israel ; and 
put them on the shoulders of the ephod, as stones of remem- 
brance of the children of Israel, as the Lord commanded Moses. 
And they made the Oracle, a work of embroidery, like the 
workmanship of the ephod, of gold and blue and purple and 
scarlet yarn and cotton thread. The Oracle they made double, 
and it was square, a span, the length ; and a span, the breadth 
on both sides. And there was interwoven with it a texture con- 
taining stones in four rows ; the first row of stones, a sardine 
and a topaz and a smaragdus ; and the second row, an anthrax 
and a sapphire and a jaspis ; and the third row, a ligure and an 
agate and an amethyst, and the fourth row, a chrysolite and a 
beryl and an onyx, set in gold and bound in with gold. Now 
these stones were twelve from the names of the sons of Israel, 
engraven like seals, every one with its peculiar name, for the 
twelve tribes. And on the oracle they made pieces of plaited 
net work, the work of a plaiter, of pure gold. They made also 
two little shields of gold and two rings of gold ; and they put 
the two rings of gold on the two upper sides of the oracle; 
and they put the two pieces of plaited work of gold on the two 
rings on the two sides of the oracle ; and they put the two 
pieces of plaited work for the the two junctions, on the 
two shields which were on the shoulders of the ephod over 
against each other in front ; and they made two rings of gold 
and put them on the two wings below the tip of the oracle and 
on the tip of the hinder part of the ephod on the inside ; and 
they made two rings of gold and put them on both the shoul- 
der pieces of the ephod underneath, over against the upper junc- 



Ck XXXVII. EXODUS. 

tion of the texture of the ephod ; and they fastened the oracle 
by the rings on it to the rings of the ephod which were fast- 
ened to it with blue yarn, being plaited into the texture of the 
ephod, that the oracle might not be loosed from the ephod, as 
the Lord commanded Moses. And they made the long robe 
under the ephod, a woven work, all of blue yarn : and the open- 
ing of the under robe in the middle was woven with a binding 
of plaited work, having a hem all around the hole that it might 
not be rent. And on the border of the robe below, they made 
clusters as of a blooming pomegranate of blue and purple and 
scarlet yarn and cotton thread : And they made golden bells 
and put the bells on the border of the robe round about be- 
tween the clusters, a golden bell and a cluster on the border 
of the robe round about, to minister in as the Lord commanded 
Moses. 

And they made cotton vestures, a woven work for Aaron 
and his sons and the tiaras of cotton and the mitre of cotton 
and the drawers of cotton, and the girdles of cotton thread and 
of blue and purple and scarlet yarn a work of embroidery as 
the Lord commanded Moses. 

And they made the plate of gold, a dedication of the sanc- 
tuary, of pure gold, and wrote thereon in letters engraved like a 
seal, Holiness to the Lord, and put it on a ribbon of blue that 
it might be hung upon the mitre above as the Lord command- 
ed Moses. 
XXXYII. They made also for the tabernacle ten curtains, the 
first eight and twenty cubits long and all the rest the same, 
and four cubits broad. And they made the veil of blue and 
purple and scarlet yarn and cotton thread, a work woven with 
cherubs and they put this on four pillars of incorruptible wood 
overlaid with gold, the capitals of which were of gold, and 
their four bases of silver. And they made the curtain of the 
door of the tabernacle of the testimony of blue and purple 
and scarlet yarn and cotton thread, a work woven with che- 
rubs, and their five pillars and hooks, the capitals and hooks 
of which they overlaid with gold, but their five bases were 
of brass. And they made the court — on the south side 
the hangings of the court were of cotton, a hundred cubits long 
with their twenty pillars, and the twenty bases thereof; and on 



!-!-! XXXVIII. EXODUS. 

the north they were the same as on the sonth side, a hundred 
cnbits with their twenty pillars and the twenty bases thereof; 
but on the end towards the sea [the west] the hangings were 
fifty cubits, and their pillars ten with their ten bases ; and on 
the east end fifty cubits, the hangings on one side of the 
gateway were fifteen cubits, their pillars three and their ba- 
ses three, and on the other side of the gateway of the court, 
the hangings were fifteen cubits, their pillars three and their 
bases three. All these hangings of the tabernacle were of cot- 
ton and the bases of the pillars were of brass, but their hooks 
were of silver and their capitals were overlaid with silver. And 
the pillars — all the pillars of the court were filleted with silver. 
And the curtain of the gate of the court was a work of tapestry 
of blue and purple and scarlet yarn and cotton thread, twenty 
cubits long and the height and breadth, five cubits, answering 
the hangings of the court, and their pillars were four, the four 
bases of which were of brass but their hooks were of silver 
and their capitals were overlaid with silver, and all the pins of 
the court round about were of brass but they were overlaid 
with silver. This was the arrangement of the tabernacle of the 
testimony, as it was given in charge to Moses, that the service 
thereof should belong to the Levites under the direction of 
Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. Now Beseleel the son of 
Ourius of the tribe of Judas performed the work as the Lord 
commanded Moses, he and Eliab the son of Achisamach of 
the tribe of Dan, who was the head workman in making the 
woven work and the embroidery and the tapestry of scarlet 
yarn and cotton thread. 
XXXVIII. Beseleel also made the ark and overlaid it with 
pure gold within and without ; and he cast the four rings of 
gold, two on the one side and two on the other, wide enough 
for the staves, with which it was to be carried : and he made 
the propitiatory above the ark of pure gold, and the two che- 
rubs of gold, one cherub at one end of the propitiatory and the 
other cherub at the other end of the propitiatory overshadow- 
ing the propitiatory with their wings. And he made the table 
to be set before it of pure gold ; and cast for it four rings, two 
on one side and two on the other, wide enough to receive the 
staves. And he made the staves of the ark and of the table, ana 



!-!-! XXXIX. EXODUS. 

overlaid tkera with gold. And he made the vessels for the ta- 
ble, the platters and the censers and the large goblets and the 
cups for making libations, all of gold. And he made the can- 
dlestick to give light also of gold, the shaft solid, and the six 
branches on both its sides. Out of its branches were knobs, three 
on one side and three on the other answering each other; and 
their lamp dishes on the tops were made in the form of almonds 
out of the same piece, with sockets in them for the lamps to 
rest on, and the seventh socket on the top of the shaft was solid, 
entirely of gold ; and he made the seven lamps upon it of gold ; 
and its snuffers of gold, and its oil vessels of gold. He also 
overlaid the pilasters with gold and cast gold rings for each 
pilaster and overlaid the bars with gold. He also gilded the 
pillars of the veil with gold and made the golden hooks, and he 
made the links of the tabernacle of gold, and the hooks of the 
court and the hooks for stretching the upper covering, of brass. 
He cast the silver capitals of the tabernacle and the brass capi- 
tals of the door of the tabernacle and for the gate of the court : 
and he made the silver hooks for the pillars — those on the top 
of the pillars he overlaid with silver. He made the brass pins 
of the tabernacle and the brass pins of the court. He made the 
brasen altar out of the brasen censers which belonged to the 
men who conspired with the congregation of Kore. He made 
all the utensils of the altar, its fire hearth and its base and the 
cups and the flesh forks which were of brass. He made for 
the altar a grate, a piece of net work below the fire hearth about 
half way up it ; and he put, on the four sides of the casing of 
the altar, the four brass rings large enough for the poles with 
which the altar is to be carried. 

He made the holy anointing oil and the compound incense 
the pure work of an apothecary. He made the brass laver and 
its base of brass out of the mirrors of the women who were 
fasting at the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony on the 
day it was set up. He made also the laver, that out of it Mo- 
ses and Aaron and his sons might wash their hands and 
their feet, when they went into the tabernacle of the testimony 
or when they went to minister at the altar. They washed out 
of it as the Lord commanded Moses. 
XXXIX. All the gold which was worked up for all the work 



Oh. XXXIX. EXODUS. 

of the holy things was of the gold of the offering twenty nine 
talents and seven hundred shekels after the shekel of the sanc- 
tuary. And the silver was the offering of silver from the men 
of the congregation who were reviewed amounting to a hun- 
dred talents, and one thousand seven hundred and seventy five 
shekels being a drachm the half of a shekel after the holy she- 
kel for each head, all who passed the review from twenty years 
old and upwards being six hundred and three thousand five 
hundred and fifty. Now the hundred talents of silver were for 
casting the hundred capitals of the tabernacle including the 
capitals of the veil, a hundred capitals for the hundred talents, 
a talent for each capital. And the thousand seven hundred and 
seventy five shekels he wrought up into hooks for the pillars. 
And he gilded the capitals and ornamented them. And the 
brass of the offering was seventy talents and a thousand five 
hundred shekels. And of this they made the bases of the doors 
of the tabernacle of the testimony and the bases of the court 
round about and the bases of the gate of the court and the pins 
of the tabernacle and the pins of the court round about, and 
the brass casing of the altar and all the utensils of the altar, 
even all the works of the tabernacle of the testimony. 

And when the Israelites had compleated the work — when 
they had compleated it in the manner the Lord had command- 
ed Moses, they then made up the rest of the gold of the offer- 
ing into vessels to be used in the holy service before the Lord. 
And what was left of the blue and purple and scarlet yarn 
they made up into sacerdotal garments for Aaron to minister 
in them, as a priest in the sanctuary. And they brought to 
Moses the robes and the tabernacle and the utensils thereof 
and its bases and bars and pilasters and the ark of the cove- 
nant with its staves, and the altar and all its utensils ; and the 
anointing oil, and the compound incense, and the pure candle- 
stick with its lamps, the lamps for burning oil and the oil for 
giving light, and the presence table and all its utensils, and 
the loaves to be laid on it, and the robes of the sanctuary ap- 
propriate to Aaron, and the robes of his sons to minister in as 
priests, and the hangings of the court and the pillars, and the 
curtain of the door of the tabernacle and of the gate of the 
court, and all the utensils of the tabernacle and all the imple- 



!-!-! XL. EXODUS. 

ments thereof, arid the upper coverings of rams' skins dyed 
red and the blue coverings, and the other coverings, and the 
pins and all the instruments for the service of the tabernacle of 
the testimony, which the Lord had commanded Moses. And 
when the children of Israel had thus made all the furniture and 
Moses had viewed all the works and they had executed them 
and made them in the manner the Lord commanded Moses, 
Moses blessed them. 
XL. Then the Lord spoke to Moses saying, On the first day 

2 of the first month it being then new moon, thou shalt rear up 
the tabernacle of the testimony and place therein the ark of the 

3 testimony and cover it with the veil. Then thou shalt carry 
in the table and set in order the service thereof. And thou shalt 

5 carry in the candlestick and place on it the lamps : and thou shalt 
set the golden altar, to burn incense, in its place before the 
ark ; and thou shalt hang up the covering curtain at the door 

6 of the tabernacle of the testimony. And the altar of homage 
offerings thou shalt place at the doors of the tabernacle of 
the testimony. Then thou shalt surround the tabernacle and 

9 hallow all the things belonging to it round about. For this 
purpose thou shalt take the anointing oil and anoint the taber- 
nacle and all the things in it and hallow it and all its utensils 
10 and they shall be holy. And thou shalt anoint the altar of ho- 
mage offerings and all its utensils and hallow the altar, and 

12 this altar shall be a holy of holies. Then thou shalt bring 
Aaron and his sons to the doors of the tabernacle of the testi- 

13 mony and wash them with water. And thou shalt put the holy 
robes on Aaron and anoint him and hallow him that he may mi- 

14 nister to me in the priest's office. Thou shalt then bring forward 
his sons and clothe them with vestures and anoint them as 

15 thou didst their father and they shall serve me as priests. And 
this unction of the priesthood shall belong to them forever 
throughout their generations. 

16 So Moses did all these things. Whatever the Lord com- 

17 manded him so did he. Accordingly in the first month in the 
second year of their coming out of Egypt, at the new moon 

18 the tabernacle was reared up. And when Moses had reared up 
the tabernacle he put on the capitals and put in the bars and 

19 set up the pilasters and spread the curtains over the taberna- 



!-!-! XL. EXODUS. 

cle and put over it the upper covering of the tabernacle as the 

20 Lord commanded Moses. Then taking the testimonies he put 

21 them in the ark, and put the staves under the ark, and carried 
the ark into the tabernacle and hung up the covering of the 
veil and covered from view the ark of the testimony in the 

22 manner the Lord commanded Moses. Then he placed the ta- 
ble in the tabernacle of the testimony, on the north side with 

23 out the veil of the tabernacle and set thereon the presence loaves 

24 before the Lord as the Lord commanded Moses. Then he 
placed the candlestick in the tabernacle of the testimony on the 

25 south side of the tabernacle and put the lamps thereon before 

26 the Lord, as the Lord commanded Moses. He then placed the 
golden altar in the tabernacle of the testimony over against the 

27 veil and burned thereon compound incense as the Lord com- 
29 manded Moses. Then he placed the altar of homage offerings 

33 at the doors of the tabernacle and reared up the court around 

34 the tabernacle and the altar. And when Moses had finished 
all these works the cloud covered the tabernacle of the testimo- 

35 ny, and the tabernacle was filled with the glory of the Lord so 
that Moses could not go into the tabernacle of the testimony, 
because the cloud overshadowed it and with the glory of the 
Lord the tabernacle was filled. 

36 Now when the cloud ascended from the tabernacle, the 

37 Israelites prepared to march with their baggage. But if the 
cloud did not ascend they did not prepare to march till the day 

38 when the cloud ascended. For there was a cloud on the taber- 
nacle by day and in the night there was a fire on it in the sight 
of all Israel throughout all their journeyings. 

LEVITICUS. 

I. Then the Lord called up Moses and spoke to him out of 
the tabernacle of the testimony saying, Speak to the children 

2 of Israel and thou shalt say to them, When any man among 
you bringeth gifts to the Lord from your cattle, you shall 

3 bring them either from the flocks or the herds. If his gift be 
a whole burnt offering from the herd, he shall bring a male 
without blemish to the door of the tabernacle of the testimony. 

4 He shall bring it before the Lord for acceptance; and he shall 

vol. I. x 



!-!-! II. LEVITICUS. 

lay his hand on the head of the homage offering to be accept- 

5 ed for him — to make atonement for him. And they shall kill 
the young bull before the Lord ; and the sons of Aaron the 
priests shall carry the blood and pour it out round about on 

6 the altar which is at the doors of the tabernacle of the testimo- 
ny ; and having flayed the whole burnt offering they shall cut 

7 it in quarters ; and the sons of Aaron the priests shall put the 

8 fire on the altar and pile wood on the fire ; and the sons of 
Aaron the priests shall lay the quarters with the head and the 

9 suet on the wood which is on the fire on the altar ; and they 
shall wash the entrails and the feet with water, and the priests 
shall lay them all on the altar. It is an homage gift, a sacrifice, 
a smell of fragrance for the Lord. 

10 And if his gift to the Lord be from the flocks, either from 
the lambs or the kids for a whole burnt offering, he shall bring 

11a male without blemish and he shall lay his hands on its head ; 
and they shall kill it on the north side of the altar before the 
Lord : and the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall pour the blood 

12 on the altar round about ; then they shall cut it in quarters 
and the priests shall lay these with the head and the suet on the 

13 wood which is on the fire on the altar ; and they shall wash the 
entrails and the feet with water; and the priests shall carry 
them all up and lay them on the altar. It is an homage offer- 
ing, a sacrifice, a smell of fragrance for the Lord. 

14 And if he bring an homage offering from among the fowls 
as his gift to the Lord ; he shall bring his gift either from 

15 among the turtle doves or the pigeons ; and the priest shall 
carry it to the altar and wring off the head, and the priest 

16 shall lay it on the altar ; then he shall squeeze out the blood 
against the base of the altar ; and he shall take away the craw 
with the feathers and throw it on the east side of the altar into 
the ash hole, then he shall break it off from the wings but shall 

17 not divide it ; and the priest shall lay it on the altar, on the 
wood which is upon the fire. It is an homage offering, a sacri- 
fice, a smell of fragrance for the Lord. 

II. And when any person shall bring a sacrificial gift to the 
Lord, his gift shall be fine flour, and he shall pour oil on it 
2 and lay frankincense on it. It is a sacrifice ; and he shall car- 
ry it to the sons of Aaron, the priests ; and the priest having 



!-!-! III. LEVITICUS. 

taken out a handful of the flour with the oil, and all the frank - 

3 incense thereof shall lay this memorial of it on the altar. Tt is 
a sacrifice, a smell of fragrance for the Lord. And the rest of the 
sacrifice shall be for Aaron and his sons, a most holy portion 
from the sacrifices of the Lord. 

4 And if he bring a gift, a baked sacrifice from the oven, his 
gift to the Lord shall be of fine flour — he shall bring unleav- 
ened loaves tempered with oil or unleavened cakes anointed 

f) with oil. And if thy gift be a sacrifice from the pan, it must 

6 be of fine flour tempered with oil, without leaven. And hav- 
ing broken it to pieces thou shalt crumble the fragments and 

7 pour oil thereon. It is a sacrifice to the Lord. And if thy gift 
be a sacrifice from the hearth, the fine flour must be made up 

8 with oil. And he shall bring the sacrifice which he hath pre- 
pared of these materials for the Lord and carry it to the priest ; 

9 and the priest shall carry it near to the altar and shall take from 
the sacrifice the memorial of it and lay it on the altar. It is an 
homage offering, a smell of fragrance for the Lord ; and the 

10 rest of the sacrifice shall be for Aaron and his sons. These are 
most holy portions from the homage offerings of the Lord. 

11 Every sacrifice which you bring to the Lord, you shall pre- 
pare without leaven ; for you must not bring any kind of leaven, 

1 2 not even honey, as a gift to pay homage to the Lord. You may 
bring them as gifts of first fruits to the Lord ; but they shall 
not be laid on the altar for a smell of fragrance for the Lord. 

13 Every gift of your sacrifice must be seasoned with salt. 
You shall not withhold the salt of the covenant of the Lord 
from your sacrifices. With every gift you make, you shall 
offer salt to the Lord your God. 

14 And when thou bringest a sacrifice of first fruits to the Lord, 

15 it must be young parched grains broken in the mill. This sa- 
crifice of the first fruits thou shalt offer to the Lord, and thou 
shalt pour oil on it and put frankincense on it. It is a sacrifice. 

16 And the priest shall carry up as the memorial of it some of the 
broken grains with all the frankincense. Tt is an homage offer- 
ing to the Lord. 

III. And if his gift to the Lord be a sacrifice of thanksgiving, 

and he bring it from the herd, whether it be a male or a female, 

2 he shall bring it without blemish before the Lord and shall lay 



!-!-! III. LEVITICUS. 

his hands on the head of the gift and kill it before the Lord at 
the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony. And the sons of 
Aaron, the priests shall pour the blood on the altar of whole 

3 burnt offerings round about : And from the sacrifice of thanks- 
giving they shall offer up as an homage offering to the Lord 
the caul which covereth the belly and all the suet on the belly 

4 and the two kidneys with the suet on them, and that on the 
flanks, and with the kidneys he shall take off the lobe of the 

5 liver. And the sons of Aaron, the priests shall offer up these 
on the altar— on the whole burnt offerings which are on the 
wood on the fire. It is an offering of homage, a smell of fra- 
grance for the Lord. 

6 And if his gift be a sacrifice of thanksgiving to the Lord 
from the flock, whether it be a male or a female, he shall offer 

7 it without blemish. If he bring a lamb as his gift he shall bring 

8 it before the Lord and lay his hands on the head of his gift and 
kill it at the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony, and the 
sons of Aaron the priest shall pour the blood on the altar round 

9 about. And from the sacrifice of thanksgiving he shall offer as 
an offering of homage to the Lord the fat tail and the whole 
loin which he shall take off with the rump ; and having taken 

10 off the caul which covereth the inwards and all the fat on the 
belly and the two kidneys with the suet on them and on the 
loin and the lobe of the liver with the kidneys the priest shall 

11 offer up these on the altar. It is a sweet savour, an offering of 
homage to the Lord. 

12 And if his gift be from the goats, he shall bring it before 

13 the Lord and lay his hands on its head, xlnd they shall kill it 
before the Lord at the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony ; 
and the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall pour out the blood 

14 against the altar round about ; And from it he shall offer up as 
an offering of homage to the Lord the caul which covereth the 
belly and all the fat on the belly and both the kidneys and all 

15 the suet on them. That on the loins and the lobe of the liver 
he shall take off with the kidneys and the priest shall offer them 

16 on the altar. It is an offering of homage, a smell of fragrance 
for the Lord. 

17 All the .suet for (lie Lord shall be an ordinance for ever 
throughout your generations. You shall not eat suet nor blood 
of any kind. 



Ck. IV. LEVITICUS. 

IV. Again the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Speak to the chil- 

2 dren of Israel and say, When any person sinneth unwittingly 
before the Lord, and doth any of those things, which by any 

3 of the commandments of the Lord he ought not to do — if for 
instance the chief priest who hath been anointed, sin ; on the 
accouut of his causing the people to sin, he shall, for the sin 
w hich he hath committed, bring a young bull without blemish 

4 from the herd before the Lord for his sin offering ; and having 
brought the young bull to the door of the tabernacle of the 
testimony before the Lord he shall lay his hand on the head 
of the young bull before the Lord and slay the bull in the pre- 

5 sence of the Lord; And the priest who is anointed, he whose 
hands have been consecrated, having taken some of the blood 
of the bull shall carry it into the tabernacle of the testimony. 

G And this priest shall dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle 
some of the blood seven times before the Lord, before the holy 

7 veil ; and he shall put some of the blood of the bull on the horns 
of the altar of compound incense, which is before the Lord in 
the tabernacle of the testimony. Now all the blood of the bull 
he is to pour out at the base of the altar of whole burnt offer- 
ings which is at the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony. 

8 And with regard to all the suet of the bull for the sin offering, 
he shall strip off the caul, which covereth the entrails and all 

9 the fat on the entrails and the two kidneys with the suet on 
them — that which is on the loins and the lobe which is on the 

10 liver he shall strip off with the two kidneys in the same man- 
ner as it is to be taken from the young bull of the sacrifice of 
thanksgiving ; and the priest shall offer up these upon the altar 

11 of homage offerings : but the skin of the bull and all his flesh 
with the head and the limbs and the belly and the dung even 

12 the whole bull they shall carry forth without the camp to a clean 
place where the ashes are emptied out, and burn him on wood 
with fire. On the out pourings of the ashes he shall be burned. 

13 And if the whole congregation of Israel be unwittingly ig- 
norant and a commandment hath escaped the notice of the 
whole congregation, and they shall do an act, which by any of 
the commandments of the Lord ought not to be done and shall 

14 transgress : when the sin which they have thereby committed 
is made known to them, the congregration shall bring a young 



!-!-! IV. LEVITICUS. 

bull from the herd without blemish for their siu offering ; and 
when they have brought him to the doors of the tabernacle of 

15 the testimony, the elders of the congregation shall lay their 
hands on the head of the bull before the Lord and slay the 

10 bull before the Lord ; and the priest, the anointed one shall 
carry some of the blood of the bull into the tabernacle of the 

17 testimony ; and the priest shall dip his linger into some of the 
blood of the bull and sprinkle it seven times before the Lord 

1 S in front of the holy veil, and shall put some of the blood on 
the horns of the altar of compound incense which is before the 
Lord in the tabernacle of the testimony. Now all the blood 
he is to pour out at the base of the altar of homage offerings 

19 which is at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony. Then 
he shall take off all the suet of the victim and carry it up upon 
the altar and shall do with this bull in the same manner as was 

20 done with the bull for the sin offering. This being done the 
priest shall make atonement for them, and the sin shall be for- 

21 given them. But they must carry forth the whole bull out of 
the camp and burn him as they did the former bull. It is a sin 
offering of the congregation. 

22 And if the chief sin or do inadvertently any of those things 
which by the commands of the Lord his God ought not to be 

23 done and commit sin or trespass ; when the sin which he hath 
thereby committed is made known to him he shall bring as 

24 his gift a goat from the goats a male without blemish, and he 
shall lay his hand on the head of the goat, and they shall kill it 
in the place where they kill the whole burnt offerings before 

25 the Lord. It is a sin offering. And the priest with his finger 
shall put some of the blood of this sin offering on the horns of 
the altar of whole burnt offerings. Now all the blood thereof 
he is to pour out at the base of the altar of whole burnt offer- 

26 ings and he shall offer all the suet thereof on the altar as he did 
the suet of the sacrifice of thanksgiving. So the priest shall 
make atonement for him because of the sins which he hath 
committed and it shall be forgiven him. 

27 And if any of the people of the land sin inadvertently by 
doing any of those things which by the commands of the Lord 

28 ought not to be done and shall transgress ; when the sin which 
he hath thereby committed is made known to him, he shall 



Cb. V. LEVITICUS. 

bring a goat from the goats — he shall bring a she goat without 

29 blemish for the sin which he hath committed and shall lay his 
hand on the head of the sin offering ; and they shall kill this 
she goat for his sin offering in the place where they kill the 

30 whole burnt offerings. And the priest shall take some of the 
blood thereof with his finger and put it on the horns of the al- 

31 tar of whole burnt offerings. Now all the blood thereof he is to 
pour out at the base of the altar. And he shall strip off all the 
suet in the same manner as suet is stripped from a sacrifice of 
thanksgiving ; and the priest shall offer it on the altar for a 
smell of fragrance for the Lord. So shall the priest make 

"'VI atonement for him and he shall be forgiven. And if he bring a 
sheep as his gift for his sin offering, he shall bring a ewe with- 

oo out blemish, and lay his hand on the head of the sin offering ; 
and they shall kill it in the place where they kill the whole burnt 

34 offerings ; and the priest having taken up with his finger some 
of the bijod of the sin offering shall put it on the horns of the 
altar of whole burnt offerings. Now all the blood thereof he 

35 is to pour out at the base of the altar of whole burnt offerings : 
and he shall strip off' all its suet in the same manner as the 
suet is stripped from the sheep for a sacrifice of thanksgiving ; 
and the priest shall lay it on the altar on the whole burnt offer- 
ing of the Lord. So shall the priest make atonement lor him 
and he shall be forgiven. 

V. And when any person shall sin inadvertently — now should 

one be adjured and being a witness hath either seen or known, 

2 if he do not tell, he will contract that sin ; or if any person 
touch any unclean thing, either a corpse, or the unclean prey 
of wild beasts, or the carcases of unclean abominations, or the 

3 carcases of unclean beasts, or shall touch any impurity of 
man — any of his impurities by the touching of which one 
would be defiled, and it escaped his notice and he hath after- 

4 wards come to the knowledge of it ; or if a person be a trans- 
gressor, either pronouncing with his lips to do evil ; or to do 
good according to all that the man might pronounce with an 
oath and it hath escaped his notice ; when he hath come to the 
knowledge of his having inadvertently sinned in any of these 

.j cases, he shall confess his sin in respect to whatever he hath 
(J sinned ; and for trespassing against the Lord, for the sin which 



!-!-! V. LEVITICUS. 

he hath sinned, he shall bring a female from the flock either a 
lamb or a kid of the goats for a sin offering ; and the priest 
shall make atonement for him for the sin which he hath sinned ; 

7 and the sin shall be forgiven him. And if he is not able to 
fnrnish a larnb, he shall bring for the trespass which he hath 
committed two turtle doves or two young pigeons to the Lord, 
one for a sin offering and the other for a whole burnt offering : 

8 and he shall carry them to the priest and the priest shall offer 
that for the sin offering, first. And the priest shall wring off its 

9 head from the neck, but shall not divide it ; and he shall sprin- 
kle some of the blood of that which is for a sin offering on the 
side of the altar and squeeze out the rest of the blood on the 

10 base of the altar. It is a sin offering. Then he shall offer the 
other as an offering of homage in the usual manner. So shall 
the priest make atonement for him for the sin which he hath 

11 committed and it shall be forgiven him. But if his hand can- 
not find a pair of doves or two young pigeons, then he shall 
bring as his gift for the sin which he hath committed the tenth 
of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering. Upon this he shall 
not pour oil, nor shall he lay incense on it, because it is a sin 

12 offering. And he shall bring it to the priest; and the priest 
having taken his handful from it shall lay this memorial of it 

13 on the altar of whole burnt offerings for the Lord. It is a sin 
offering. So shall the priest make atonement for him, for the 
sin which he hath committed and it shall be forgiven him. 
And what is left shall be for the priest, as the sacrifice of fine 
flour. 

14 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses saying, If a person 
through inadvertence hath forgotten or been unwittingly defi- 

15 cient in any of the holy things of the Lord ; when he shall bring 
for his trespass against the Lord a ram without blemish from 
the flock, thou must estimate in silver shekels, by the shekel 
of the sanctuary, the value of that in respect to which he hath 

16 trespassed, and he shall pay the amount of the deficiency of 
which he hath been guilty, and shall add thereto a fifth and give 
it to the priest ; and the priest shall make atonement for him with 
the trespass ram and he shall be forgiven. So with respect to 
every person, who may have sinned ; when he shall do any of 
those things, which by any of the commands of the Lord ought 



Ck. VI. LEVITICUS. 

not to be done, and did not know — if he hath trespassed and 

18 contracted guilt ; when he shall bring a ram without blemish 
from the flock, thou must fine him in money before the priest 
to the amount of the trespass ; and the priest shall make atone- 
ment for him, for the ignorance of which he was guilty, though 

19 he did not know ; and he shall be forgiven ; for he hath been 
guilty of a trespass in the sight of the Lord. 

VI. Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses saying, With regard 

2 to the person who shall sin, and who, utterly disregarding the 
commands of the Lord, shall lie to his neighbour touching a 
deposit, or touching any thing which he might use in common, 
or touching any thing made a prey of, whether he hath de- 

3 frauded his neighbour in any respect, or hath found what was 
lost, and shall lie concerning it ; or hath sworn falsely in respect 
to any of the things which he may have done, so as thereby to 

4 commit sin ; when he who hath thus sinned and transgressed 
hath restored the thing wrongfully taken, or that which he hath 
got unjustly, or the deposit which was committed to his trust, 

5 or the thing lost which he hath found ; then for every thing 
about which he hath sworn falsely he shall pay as a fine to the 
same amount, and add thereto a fifth. To him whose it is he 
shall make restoration on the day he is convicted. And when 

(3 for his trespass he shall bring for the Lord a ram from the flock 
without blemish, thou must fine him to the amount of his tres- 

7 pass. Then the priest shall make atonement for him before 
the Lord ; and he shall be forgiven for every of those things 
which he hath done, and by which he hath trespassed. 

8 Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Give a charge to 
Aaron and his sons, saying, This is the law of the whole 

9 burnt offering. The whole burnt offering must be burn- 
ing on the altar the whole night until the morning, and the fire 
of the altar must be kept burning thereon. It must not be extin- 

10 guished. Then the priest shall put on a linen vesture, and around 
his body he shall put on linen drawers ; and he shall take away 
the ashes, into which the fire hath consumed the whole burnt 

11 offering, from the altar, and lay them near the altar. Then he 
shall put off' liis rube, and put on another robe, and he shall car- 

12 ry forth the ashes without the camp to a clean place. And the 
fire on the altar shall be kept burning from itself, and shall not 

VOL. I. y 



!-!-! VI LEVITICUS. 

be extinguished. And the priest shall kindle wood upon it 
every morning, and shall lay the whole burnt offering in order 
upon it ; and upon it he shall lay the suet of the offerings of 

13 thanksgiving. So the fire shall be kept burning continually, and 
shall not be extinguished. 

14 This is the law of the sacrifice of flour, which the sons of 

15 Aaron shall offer before the Lord, in front of the altar. Having 
taken from it his handful of the flour of the sacrifice, with the oil 
of it, and all the frankincense which is on the sacrifice, he shall 
lay this memorial of it on the altar as an offering of homage, a 

16 smell of fragrance for the Lord. And what is left of it Aaron 
and his sons shall eat. It shall be eaten without leaven in a holy 
place. They shall eat it in the court of the tabernacle of the 

17 testimony. It shall not be baked with leaven. This portion I 
have given them from the homage offerings of the Lord. It is 
most holy, as is that of the sin offering, and as is that of the 

18 trespass offering. Every male among the priests shall eat it. 
It shall be an everlasting ordinance throughout your genera- 
tions, in respect to the homage offerings of the Lord, whoever 
shall touch them shall be hallowed. 

19 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, This is the 

20 gift of Aaron and his sons, which they shall offer to the Lord, 
on the day when thou shalt anoint him, the tenth of the ephah 
of fine flour for a continual sacrifice — the half of it in the morn- 

21 ing, and the half of it in the evening. It shall be prepared in 
a pan with oil. Being mixed up, he shall offer it in rolls, as a 
sacrifice of fragments, for a smell of fragrance for the Lord. 

22 The priest who is anointed, that one of his sons who is to suc- 
ceed him shall prepare it. This is an everlasting ordinance, 

23 Let it he all consumed. Indeed every sacrifice of a priest must 
be wholly burned. It shall not be eaten. 

24 Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to Aaron 
and his sons, and say, This is the law of the Sin offering. 

25 Wherever they kill the whole burnt offering, there they shall 
kill the sin offerings before the Lord. They are most holy. 

26 The priest who carrieth it up shall eat it in a holy place. It 
shall be eaten in the court of the tabernacle of the testimony. 

27 Every one who toucheth the flesh of it shall be hallowed. And 
if any of the blood of it shall be sprinkled on any one's gar- 



Cli. VII. LEVITICUS. 

inent, he who is sprinkled therewith shall be washed in a holy 

28 place. And if it be boiled in an earthen vessel, the vessel shall 
be broken ; but if it be boiled in a brasen vessel, they must 

29 scour it and rinse it with water. Every male among the priests 

30 shall eat thereof. It is most holy to the Lord. But none of the 
sin offerings, some of the blood of which hath been carried into 
the tabernacle of the testimony, to make an atonement in the 
sanctuary, shall be eaten. They must be burned with fire. 

VII. And this is the law of the ram for a trespass offering. It 

2 is most holy. In the place where they kill the whole burnt 
offerings, they shall kill the ram for a trespass offering before 
the Lord; and his blood shall be poured on the base of the 

3 altar all around : and of it shall be offered up the whole fat tail, 
and loin, and all the caul which covereth the entrails, and all the 

4 suet on the entrails, and the two kidneys with the suet on them. 
That on the loins, and the lobe which is on the liver, shall be 

5 stript off with the kidneys. And the priest shall carry them up 

6 upon the altar as an offering of homage to the Lord. It is a 
trespass offering. Every male among the priests shall eat there- 

7 of. They shall eat it in a holy place. It is most holy. As is 
the sin offering, so is the trespass offering. There is one law 
for both : The priest who shall make atonement with it shall 

8 have it. And the priest who offereth any man's whole burnt 
offering shall have the skin of the whole burnt offering which 

9 he offereth. And every sacrifice of flour which shall be pre- 
pared in the oven, and every one which shall be baked on the 

10 hearth, or in a pan, shall be the priest's who offereth it : and 
every sacrifice of flour, whether made up with oil or not, shall 
be for all the sons of Aaron, for one as much as another. 

11 This is the law of the sacrifice of thanks* /icing which they 

12 shall offer to the Lord— If one offereth it for praise, he shall 
bring with the sacrifice of praise loaves of fine flour make up 
with oil, and unleavened cakes anointed with oil, and fine flour 

13 tempered with oil. With loaves of leavened bread he shall pre- 
sent these gifts of his for a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving ; 
and from every of these gifts of his he shall set apart one, and 

14 present it as a dedication to the Lord. It shall be for the priest 
who poureth out the blood of the victim offered for thanks- 

15 giving. And the flesh of the victim of praise and thanksgiving 



!-!-! VII. LEVITICUS. 

sliall be for himself, and shall be eaten on the day it is offered. 

16 They shall not leave any of it till the morning. And if it be a 
vow ; or if one offer his gift as a voluntary sacrifice, it shall be 
eaten on the day he offereth his sacrifice, or the next morning. 

17 And what is left of the flesh of the sacrifice till the third day 

18 shall be burned with fire. And if any one eat of the flesh on 
the third day, it shall not be accepted for him who offereth it. 
It shall not be placed to his account. It is an abomination. 

19 Whoever shall eat it shall contract guilt. If any flesh touch 
any unclean thing, it shall not be eaten. It shall be burned 

20 with fire. Every person who is clean may eat flesh. But if 
any person shall eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of thanksgiv- 
ing, which is the Lord's, with his uncleanness upon him, that 

21 person shall be cut off from among his people. And the 
person who shall touch any unclean thing, whether it be the 
uncleanness of a man, or of unclean beasts, or any unclean 
abomination, and shall eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of thanks- 
giving, which is the Lord's, that person shall be destroyed from 
among his people. 

22 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 
'2'.) children of Israel, and say, You shall not eat any suet of cattle, 

24 nor of sheep, nor of goats. The suet of beasts which die of 
themselves, or which are torn by wild beasts, may be used for 

25 any kind of work ; but shall not be eaten for food. Whoever 
eateth of the suet of cattle of which he is to make an offering 
of homage to the Lord, that person shall be cut off from among 

26 his people. You shall not eat any blood in any of your dwell- 

27 ings, neither the blood of cattle, nor of fowls. Whoever shall 
eat blood, that person shall be cut off from among his people. 

28 The Lord also spoke to Moses, saying, Thou shalt speak 

29 to the children of Israel, and say, He who offereth a sacrifice of 
thanksgiving shall bring his gift to the Lord ; and from the 

30 sacrifice of thanksgiving his own hands shall present, as his offer- 
ings of homage to the Lord, the suet, with the breast, and the 
lobe of the liver. These he shall present that they may be laid 

31 before the Lord as a gift. And the priest shall offer up the suet 
on the altar ; and the breast shall be for Aaron and his sons. 

32 You shall also give the right shoulder, as a portion dedicated 
and set apart for the priest, from your sacrifices of thanksgiving. 



!-!-! VIII. LEVITICUS. 

33 That one of the sons of Aaron who ofifereth the blood of the 
thank offering, and the suet, shall have the right shoulder for his 

34 portion. For the breast which is dedicated by being laid upon 
hands, and the shoulder which is dedicated by being set apart, 
I have taken from the children of Israel — from your sacrifices 
of thanksgiving ; and have given them to Aaron the priest and 
his sons. It is an everlasting due from the children of Israel. 

35 This is the unction of Aaron and the unction of his sons, the 
reward assigned them from the homage offerings of the Lord, 
on the day he took them into his house to minister to the Lord 

36 in the priest's office ; and which the Lord commanded to be 
given them on the day he anointed them from among the chil- 
dren of Israel, as an everlasting due throughout their genera- 
tions. 

37 This is the law of the whole burnt offering and the sacri- 
fice of flour, and of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering 
and of the consecration offering and of the sacrifice of ihanks- 

38 giving, as the Lord commanded Moses at mount Sina, on the 
day when he commanded the children of Israel to bring their 
gifts before the Lord in the wilderness of Sina. 

VIII. Then the 'Lord spoke to Moses saying, Take Aaron 

2 and his sons, and his robes and the anointing oil, and the youn^ 
bull for the sin offering, aud the two rams, and the basket of 

3 unleavened cakes ; and assemble all the congregation at the 

4 door of the tabernacle of the testimony. And Moses did as 
the Lord commanded him. And when he had assembled the 

5 congregation at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony, Mo- 
ses said to the congregation, This is the thing which the Lord 

6 hath commanded to be done. Then Moses brought forward 

7 Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water. Then he 
arrayed him with the vesture, and girded him with the o-i rc Qe 7 
and put on him the under robe, and over it he put on the ephod, 
and girded him with the girdle of the same fabrick as the ephod, 

8 and bound him up tight with it, and put on it the oracle ; and 

9 upon the oracle he put the manifestation and the truth. Then 
he put the mitre on his head; and on the mitre, on the front 
of it, he put the golden plate, the holy sanctified jewel as the 

10 Lord commanded Moses. Then Moses took some of the 

11 anointing oil, and sprinkled some of it on the altar seven times 



Oh. \IU. LEVITICUS. 

and anointed the altar, and hallowed it and all its appurtenances, 
and the laver and its base. And when he had hallowed them 
he anointed the tabernacle, and all the utensils thereof, and hal- 

12 lowed it. Then Moses poured some of the anointing oil on 

13 the head of Aaron. And when he had anointed him, and hal- 
lowed him, then Moses brought forward the sons of Aaron, 
and arrayed them with vestures, and girded them with girdles, 
and put tiaras on them, as the Lord commanded Moses. 

14 Then Moses brought forward the young bull for the sin 
offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head 

15 of the young bull for the sin offering ; and he slew it, and Mo- 
ses took some of the blood, and put it on the horns of the altar 
round about with his finger, and purified the altar. Then he 
poured out the blood on the base of the altar. And when he 

1(3 had hallowed it to make an atonement upon it, then Moses 
took all the suet on the entrails, and the lobe which is on the 
liver, and both the kidneys with the suet on them, and car- 

17 ried them up upon the altar ; but the bull, and his hide, and his 
flesh, and his dung, these he caused to be burned with fire with- 
out the camp, as the Lord commanded Moses. 

18 Then Moses brought forward the ram which was for a 
whole burnt offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands 

19 on the head of the ram ; and Moses slew the ram, and poured 

20 the blood against the altar round about. And having divided 
the ram into quarters, Moses carried up the head, and the pieces, 

21 and the suet. Then having washed the belly and the feet with 
water, Moses carried up the whole ram upon the altar. It is a 
whole burnt offering for a smell of fragrance — an offering of 
homage to the Lord, as the Lord commanded Moses. 

22 Then Moses brought forward the other ram, which was 
for a consecration offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their 

23 hands on the head of this ram, and he slew it. And Moses took 
some of the blood thereof, and put it on the tip of Aaron's right 
ear, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe 

24 of his right foot. Then Moses brought forward the sons of 
Aaron, and put some of the blood on the tips of their right 
ears, and on the thumbs of their right hands, and on the great 
toes of their right feet. He then poured the blood against the 

25 altar round about. And he took the tail, and the loin, and the 



!-!-! IX. LEVITICUS. 

suet on the belly, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys 
with the suet on them, and the right shoulder ; and from the 

26 basket of the consecration offering, which was before the Lord, 
he took one unleavened loaf, and one loaf of oil bread, and one 

27 cake, and laid them on the suet and the right shoulder, and put 
them all on the hands of Aaron, and on the hands of his sons, 
and caused them to be lifted up as a dedication before the Lord. 

28 Then Moses took them from their hands, and carried them up 
upon the altar — on the consecration whole burnt offering, 

29 which is for a smell of fragrance. It is an offering of homage 
to the Lord. Then having taken the breast, Moses set this, which 
had been laid on hands before the Lord, apart from the ram of 
the consecration offering. And it was Moses' portion, as the 
Lord commanded Moses. 

30 Then Moses took some of the anointing oil, and some of 
the blood which was by the altar, and sprinkled them on Aaron 
and his robes, and on his sons and their robes with him. And 
when he had hallowed Aaron and his robes, and his sons and 

31 their robes with him, then Moses said to Aaron and his sons, 
Boil this flesh in the court of the tabernacle of the testimony, 
in a holy place, and eat it there with the bread which is in the 
basket of the consecration offering, as it hath been given me 

32 in charge, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat these. And 
what is left of the flesh, and of the bread, you must burn with 

33 fire. And from the door of the tabernacle of the testimony you 
shall not depart for seven days, until the day be compleated — 
the day of your consecration ; for he will consecrate your hands 

34 seven days, as he hath done this very day, in which the Lord 
hath commanded me to do this in order to make an atonement 

35 for you. You shall therefore continue seven days at the door 
of the tabernacle of the testimony. Day and night you shall 
keep the watches of the Lord, that you may not die ; for so the 
Lord GJ-od hath commanded me. 

36 And when Aaron and his sons had done all that the Lord 
IX. commanded Moses, On the eighth day Moses called Aaron 

and his sons, and the senate of Israel, and Moses said to Aaron, 

2 Take for thyself a calf from the herd for a sin offering, and a 
ram for a whole burnt offering, both without blemish (Now 

3 he had brought them before the Lord) and speak to the senate 



!-!-! IX. LEVITICUS. 

of Israel saying, Take ye a kid of the goats for a sin offering, 

and a calf and a lamb of the first year for an homage offering, 

•1 all without blemish, and a young bull and a ram for a sacrifice 

of thanksgiving before the Lord, and fine flour tempered with 

5 oil ; for to-day the Lord will appear among you. And when 
they had brought them, as Moses commanded, over against 
the tabernacle of the testimony, and all the congregation were 

6 come, and stood before the Lord, Moses said, This is the thing 
which the Lord hath commanded ; do it, and the glory of the 

7 Lord will appear among you. Then Moses said to Aaron, Go 
near to the altar, and offer thy own sin offering, and thy own 
burnt offering, and make atonement for thyself and thy house, 
then offer the gifts of the people, and make atonement for them, 

8 as the Lord commanded Moses. Accordingly Aaron went near 
to the altar, and slew the calf for his own sin offering, and the 

9 sons of Aaron brought the blood to him, and he dipped his 

10 finger in the blood, and put it on the horns of the altar, and 
having poured out the blood on the base of the altar, he carried 
up the suet, and the kidneys, and the lobe of the liver, of the sin 

11 offering, upon the altar as the Lord commanded Moses, and 
the flesh and the skin he caused to be burned with fire with- 
out the camp. 

12 Then he slew the whole burnt offering, and the sons of Aaron 
brought him the blood, and he poured it out against the altar 

13 round about. Then they presented the whole burnt offering by 

14 pieces, and these and the head he laid on the altar. He then 
washed the belly and the feet with water, and laid them on the 
whole burnt offering on the altar. 

15 Then he brought forward the gift of the people, and he took 
the goat for the sin offering of the people, and slew it, and pu- 

16 rifled it as he had done the first. He then brought forward the 
whole burnt offering, and did with it in the manner prescribed. 

17 Then, presenting the sacrifice of flour, he filled his hands with 
some of it, and laid the handful on the altar apart from the 

18 morning whole burnt offering. 

Then he slew the young bull and the ram for the people's 
sacrifice of thanksgiving ; and the sons of Aaron brought him 
the blood ; and he poured it out against the altar round about. 

19 And the suet of the bull and that of the ram with the loin and the 



Oh. X. LEVITICUS. 

caul which covereth the belly, and the two kidneys with the 
suet on them, and the lobe of the liver— the several parcels of 

20 suet he laid on the breast, and having carried up the suet upon 

21 the altar, Aaron took away the breast and the right shoulder as 
a portion set apart before the Lord, as the Lord commanded 
Moses. 

Then Aaron, lifting up his hands over the people, blessed 

22 them— When he came down from offering the sin offering, and 

23 the whole burnt offerings, and the offerings of thanksgiving, and 
Closes and Aaron had gone into the tabernacle of the testimo- 
ny, and come out and blessed all the people, then the glory of 

24 the Lord appeared to all the people, and there came forth a fire 
from the Lord which consumed what were on the altar, both 
the whole burnt offerings and the parcels of suet. And when 
all the people saw this, they were struck with consternation and 

X. fell on their faces ; and the two sons of Aaron, Nadab and 

Abiud, having taken each his censer, laid fire on it, and threw 
incense thereon, and presented before the Lord strange fire, 

2 which the Lord had not ordered them; upon which a fire 
darted forth from the Lord, and destroyed them, and they died 

3 before the Lord. Whereupon Moses said to Aaron, This is 
what the Lord spoke, saying, I will be hallowed by them who 
come near me, and glorified by all the congregation ; and Aaron 

4 was pierced with anguish. Then Moses called Misado and 
Elisaphan, the sons of Oziel, the sons of Aaron's uncle, and 
said to them, Go near and carry out your brethren from before 

5 the holies, out of the camp. So they went near, and carried them, 

6 in their vestures, out of the camp, as Moses ordered. Then 
Moses said to Aaron, and to Eleazar, and Ithamar, his surviving 
sons, Uncover not your heads, nor rend your garments, lest 
you die, and wrath come on the whole congregation: but let 
your brethren, the whole house of Israel, bewail this burning with 

7 which the Lord hath burned them. But you must not go from 
the door of the tabernacle of the testimony lest you die ; for the 
anointing oil of the Lord is upon you. So they did according 
to the command of Moses. 

8 And the Lord spoke to Aaron, saying, Thou, and thy suns 

9 with thee, must not drink wine nor strong drink, when you 
come into the tabernacle of the testimony, or when you ap- 

vol. I. z 



!-!-! XL LEVITICUS. 

proach the altar, lest you die. It is your everlasting privilege, 

10 throughout your generations, to distinguish between holy things 
and things unholy, and between clean and unclean things, and 

11 to teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the Lord 
hath delivered them by the ministration of Moses. 

12 Then Moses said to Aaron, and to Eleazar, and Ithamar, 
the sons of Aaron, who were left, Take the sacrifice of flour 
which was left from the homage offerings of the Lord, and eat 

13 the unleavened bread near the altar. It is most holy ; therefore 
you must eat it in a holy place ; for this is thy due, and thy sons 
due, from the homage offerings of the Lord : for so it hath been 

14 given me in charge. The dedicated breast, and the dedicated 
shoulder, which are set apart, you shall eat in a holy place, thou, 
and thy sons, and thy household with thee, for it hath been given 
thee as thy due, and to thy sons as their due from the thank of- 

15 ferings of the children of Israel. The dedicated shoulder, and 
the dedicated breast, they shall offer on the homage offerings 
of suet, to be set apart as a dedication before the Lord; and 
they shall be for thee, and for thy sons, and for thy daughters 
with thee, an everlasting due, as the Lord commanded Moses. 

16 Now when Moses made diligent search for the goat of the 
sin offering, and behold it was burned, Moses was angry with 
Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron who were left, and said, 

1 7 Why did you not eat the sin offering in a holy place ? for be- 
cause it is most holy, he hath given this to you to eat, that you 
may take away the sin of the congregation, and make atonement 

18 for them before the Lord ; for none of its blood was carried into 
the sanctuary. You should have eaten it publicly in the court, 

19 in a holy place, as the Lord commanded me. Upon this Aaron 
spoke to Moses, saying, Though they have this day brought 
their sin offerings and their whole burnt offerings before the 
Lord ; yet such things having befallen me, had I this day eaten 
their sin offering, would it have been well pleasing to the Lord ? 

20 Upon hearing this Moses was satisfied with him. 

XL Again the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, Speak 

2 to the children of Israel, and say, Among all the beasts which 

3 are on the earth, these are the beasts which you may eat. Every 
beast having a double hoof, its hoof parted into two distinct 
hoofs, and bringing up the cud, these among the beasts you 



!-!-! XL LEVITICUS. 

4 may eat. But of these you shall not eat — of those which chew 
the cud, and of those which have parted hoofs — the camel, 

5 though it cheweth the cud ; yet because it hath not a parted 
hoof, it is unclean to you ; the hairy foot, though it cheweth 
the cud, yet because it hath not a parted hoof, it is unclean to 

6 you ; and the choirogryllus, though it cheweth the cud, yet be- 

7 cause it hath not a parted hoof, it is unclean to you ; and the 
swine, though it hath a parted hoof, yet because it doth not chew 

8 the cud, it is unclean to you. Of the flesh of these you shall 
not eat ; nor shall you touch their dead carcases. They are un- 
clean to you. 

9 And these are what you may eat of all that are in the wa- 
ters : all that have fins and scales, in the waters or in the seas, 

10 or in the brooks, these you may eat ; but all that have not 
fins and scales in the waters, and in the seas, and in the brooks, 
of all the multitudes which the waters produce, and of all the 
living creatures in the waters, are an abomination, and shall be 

11 an abomination to you. Of their flesh you shall not eat; and 

12 their dead carcases you shall abominate. All in the waters 
which have not fins and scales are an abomination to you. 

lo And among the birds, these are what you must abominate, 
and which shall not be eaten ; they are an abomination ; the 
eagle, and the ospray, and the cormorant, and the vulture, and 
the kite and all of its kind, and the ostrich, and the owl, and 
the gull and all of its kind, and crows of all sorts and their kind, 
and the hawk and all its kind, and the night hawk, and the ca- 
taractes, and the ibis, and the porphurion, and the pelican, and 
the swan, and the heron, and the charadrius and all of its kind, 
and the puet, and the bat. 

20 All the flying reptiles also which walk on four feet are 

21 abominations to you : but of the flying reptiles which walk on 
four feet, you may eat those which have legs above their feet 

22 to hop with them on the ground. These of them in particular 
you may eat, the brouchus-locust and its species, and the al- 
take-locust and all its species, and the serpent-fighter and all 

23 its species, and the grasshopper and all its species. Every fly- 
ing reptile which hath four feet is an abomination to you. 

24 With them you must not defile yourselves. Whosoever touch- 

25 eth their dead carcases shall be unclean until the evening. And 



!-!-! XI. LEVITICUS. 

whoever carrieth any of their carcases shall wash his clothes, 

26 and be unclean until evening. And among all the beasts what- 
ever hath a hoof parted in two — a hoof divided into two hoofs, 

27 but cheweth not the cud, shall be unclean to you. And whoever 
toucheth their carcases shall be unclean until evening. And 
every beast which walketh on paws among all the beasts which 

28 walk on four feet, is unclean to you. Whoever toucheth their car- 
cases shall be unclean until the evening. And he who carrieth 
any of their carcases shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until 

29 the evening. These are unclean to you. And of the reptiles 
which are on the earth, these are unclean to you — the weasel, and 

30 the mouse, and the lizzard, and the toad, and the chamelion, and 

31 the spicier, and the rat, and the mole. These are unclean to 
you above all the reptiles which are on the earth. Whoever 
toucheth them when dead, shall be unclean until the evening. 

32 And upon whatsoever any of them, when dead, shall fall, it shall 
be unclean ; whether it be a vessel of wood, or a garment, or a 
sack, every utensil in which any work is done shall be plunged 
in water, and shall be unclean until evening. Then it shall be 

33 clean. And if any of them fall into a vessel made of clay, all 

34 that is in it shall be unclean, and it shall be broken ; and every 
kind of meat which is eatable, upon which water out of it shall 
come, shall be unclean ; and every kind of drink which may be 

35 drunk in every such earthen vessel shall be unclean. And 
every thing upon which any of their dead carcases may fall 
shall be unclean. Ovens, and stands for pots, shall be broken 

36 down : they are unclean, and shall be unclean to you. But foun- 
tains of water, and a lake, or collection of water, shall be clean. 

37 And he who toucheth their carcases shall be unclean. If any 
of their carcases fall on seed which is to be sown it shall be 

38 clean. But if water hath been poured on any kind of grain, and 
any of their carcases fall upon it, it shall be unclean to you. 

39 Now if any of those beasts which you may lawfully eat 
should happen to die, he who toucheth their dead carcases shall 

40 be unclean until evening. And he who eateth of their car- 
cases shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until evening. 
And he who carrieth any of their carcases shall wash his clothes, 
and wash himself with water, and be unclean until evening. 

41 Moreover every creeping thing which creepeth on the 



!-!-! XII. LEVITICUS. 

earth shall be an abomination to you. It shall not be eaten. 

42 Whether it runneth on its belly, or goeth continually on four, 
whatever among the reptiles, which creep on the earth, hath 

43 many feet, this you shall not eat; for it is an abomination to 
you ; and you should not pollute yourselves with any of the 
reptiles which creep on the earth. You indeed are not to pol- 

44 lute yourselves with them, nor be made unclean by them. Be- 
cause I am the Lord your God, therefore you must hallow 
yourselves, and be holy, because I the Lord your God am ho- 
ly. And you must not defile yourselves with any of the rep- 

45 tiles, which creep on the earth, because I am the Lord who 
brought you up out of Egypt, to be your God. You shall 
therefore be holy, because I the Lord am holy. 

46 This is the law respecting beasts, and fowls, and every living 
creature which moveth in the water, and every living creature 

47 which creepeth on the earth, to distinguish between the un- 
clean and the clean, and between the viviparous animals which 
may be eaten, and the viviparous which are not to be eaten. 

XII. Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 

2 children of Israel, and say unto them, When a woman hath 
conceived, and brought forth a male, she shall be unclean seven 
days. During her days of separation for her lying in she shall 

3 be unclean. And on the eighth day she shall circumcise the 

4 flesh of his foreskin, and continue thirty three days in her im- 
purity. She shall not touch any thing that is hallowed, nor 
come to the sanctuary, until the days of her purification be 

5 compleated. But if she hath brought forth a female, she shall 
be unclean twice seven days for her lying in, and shall con- 

6 tinue sixty six days in her impurity. And when the days of 
her purification are compleated, either for a son or a daughter, 
she shall bring a lamb of the first year, without blemish, for a 
whole burnt offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtle dove, 
for a sin offering, to the door of the tabernacle of the testimo- 

7 ny, to the priest, and present it before the Lord. And the priest 
shall make atonement for her, and purify her from the issue of 

8 her blood. This is the law touching her who beareth a male 
or a female child. But if she be not in circumstances to furnish 
a lamb, she shall take two turtle doves, or two young pigeons, 
one for a whole burnt offering, and one for a sin offering, and 



!-!-! XIII. LEVITICUS. 

the priest shall make atonement for her and she shall be cleansed. 

XIII. Again the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, If 

2 any man hath, on the outer coat of the skin, a remarkable 

swelling, very white, and there be a touch of the leprosy 

on the outer coat of his skin, he shall be brought to 

•') Aaron the veriest, or to one of his sons, the priests: and the 

priest shall look at the touch on the outer coat of his skin ; and 

if the hair in the touch be turned white, and the appearance of 

the touch be deeper than the outer skin, it is a touch of the 

leprosy. And when the priest shall see this, he shall pronounce 

4 him unclean. But though the whiteness be exceedingly bright 
on the outer coat of the skin, if the appearance of it be not 
deeper than the outer coat, and the hair thereof be not turned 

5 white, but is of a duskish colour ; the priest shall set apart the 
patient seven day. And on the seventh day the priest shall 
view the touch; and if the touch still remaineth before him, 
but hath not spread on the outer skin, the priest shall set him 

6 apart seven days more. And on the seventh day the priest 
shall look on him again, and if the touch be languid, and hath 
not spread on the outer skin, the priest shall pronounce him 

7 clean ; for it is but a mark. And having washed his clothes, 
he shall be clean. But if* the mark on the outer skin shall 
change, and spread, after the priest viewed him for the purpose 

8 of pronouncing him clean, he shall again appear before the 
priest, and the priest shall view him; and if the mark hath 
spread on the skin, the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It 

9 is a leprosy. And when any man hath a touch of the leprosy, 

10 he shall come to the priest ; and the priest shall view it : and 
if there be a white swelling on the outer skin, and it hath 

11 changed the hair, and there be some raw flesh in the swelling, 
it is an inveterate leprosy in the outer skin of the flesh, and the 
priest shall pronounce him unclean, and set him apart, for he is 

12 unclean. But if the leprosy hath formed an efflorescence on 
the outer skin, and covered the whole skin of the patient from 
head to foot, wherever the priest looketh : and the priest shall 

13 look and see that the leprosy hath covered the whole skin of 

14 the flesh, the priest shall pronounce him clean. Because it hath 
turned all white it is clean. But whenever raw flesh appeareth 

15 on him he shall become unclean. When the priest shall see the 



!-!-! XIII. LEVITICUS. 

raw flesh, that raw flesh shall announce him unclean ; for he 

16 is unclean. It is a leprosy. But if the raw flesh stop, ami turn 

17 white, he shall come to the priest. And when the priest shall 
look, and see that the touch is turned white, the priest shall 

18 pronounce him clean. In regard to the touch he is clean. And 

19 if the flesh at the outer skin hath been a boil, and healed, and in 
the place of the boil there be a white swelling of a very shin- 

20 ing whiteness or redness, he shall appear before the priest; and 
when the priest shall see that the appearance is deeper than the 
outer skin, and that the hair is changed white, the priest shall 
pronounce him unclean, for it is a leprosy ; it hath broken out 

21 in the boil. But if the priest shall see that there is no white hair 
in it, and that it is not deeper than the outer skin, and the hair 
is of a duskish colour, the priest shall set him apart seven days. 

22 And if it actually spread on the skin, the priest shall pronounce 
him unclean. It is a touch of the leprosy. It hath broken out 

23 in the boil. But if the brightness continueth in its place and is 
not spread ; it is the effect of the boil and the priest shall pro- 

24 nounce him clean. And if the flesh hath been a burn of lire, 
and the burn when healed become remarkably splendent, 

2.*> whitish, reddish, or very white, the priest shall view it : and if 
the white hair hath changed to a shining whiteness, and the ap- 
pearance is deeper than the skin, it is a leprosy. It hath broken 
out in the burn. So the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It 

26 is a touch of the leprosy. But if the priest see that there is no 
white hair in the bright spot, and that it is not deeper than the 
skin, but is of a brownish colour, the priest shall set him apart 

27 seven days ; and on the seventh day the priest shall view him ; 
and if it hath actually spread on the skin, the priest shall pro- 
nounce him unclean. It is a touch of the leprosy. It hath 

28 broken out in the blister. But if the shining spot remaineth in 
its place, and hath not spread on the skin, and the hair be of a 
brownish colour, it is the effect of the burn, and the priest shall 

29 pronounce him clean ; for it is the scar of the burn. And if 

30 any man or woman hath a touch of the leprosy in the head or 
on the chin, the priest shall view the touch ; and if he perceive 
that the appearance of the touch is deeper than the skin, and 
that the hair in it is thin, and of a yellowish colour, the priest 
shall pronounce the person unclean. It is a scald, a leprosy of 



!-!-! XIII. LEVITICUS. 

31 the head, or a leprosy of the chin. But if the priest, upon view- 
ing the touch of the scald, see that the appearance of it is not 
deeper than the skin, and that the hair in it is not of a yellowish 
colour, the priest shall set apart the person who hath the touch 

32 of the scald, seven days. And on the seventh day the priest 
shall view the touch ; and if the scald hath not spread, and 
there be no yellowish hair in it, and the appearance of the scald 

33 is not deeper than the skin ; then the skin must be shaved ; 
but the scald must not be shaved, and the priest shall set apart 

34 the scald seven days more. And on the seventh day, if the 
priest, upon viewing the scald see that the scald hath not spread 
on the skin after the patient was shaved, and that the appear- 
ance of the scald is not deeper than the skin, the priest shall 
pronounce him clean ; and, having washed his clothes, he shall 

35 be clean. But if the scald spread on the skin after the person 

36 hath been pronounced clean, and the priest, upon viewing it, 
shall see that the scald hath spread on the skin, the priest shall 
examine no farther about the yellow hair, for he is unclean. 

37 But, if upon his viewing it, the scald continueth in its place, and 
the black hair grow in it, the scald is healed. He is clean, and the 

38 priest shall pronounce him clean. And if any man or woman 
hath shining spots on the skin of the flesh, of a shining white- 

39 ness ; and the priest, upon viewing it, see in the skin of the flesh 
spots of a shining whiteness, it is a kind of leucophlegmacy ; 

40 it springeth up in the skin of the flesh ; he is clean. And if any 
person's head shed its hair, though he be bald he is clean. And 

41 if his head shed its hair before, he is forehead bald, yet he is 

42 clean. But, if on the bald head, or bald forehead, there come a 
white or red spot, it is a leprosy in the bald head, or bald fore- 

43 head. And if the priest, upon viewing, see that the appearance 
of the spot is white, or reddish, in the bald head, or bald forehead, 
like the appearance of the leprosy in the skin of the flesh, he is 

44 a leprous man, the priest shall instantly pronounce him un- 
clean. The touch is in his head. 

45 Now the leper who hath the touch, must have his clothes 
rent, and his head uncovered, but he must cover his mouth, and 

46 he shall be proclaimed unclean. All the time the touch shall 
be upon him, being unclean, he shall be unclean, he shall 
dwell alone by himself. His abode shall be without the camp. 



!-!-! XIV. LEVITICUS. 

47 And if there be a touch of leprosy in a garment of wool, or 
a garment of hemp, or any web woven, or any thing made of 
linens or woollens, or in any skin, or workmanship made of 

49 skin, and the touch be of a greenish or reddish colour in the 
skin, or in the garment, or in the woven web, or in any vessel 
made of skin, it is a touch of the leprosy, and must be shewn 

50 to the priest. And the priest, upon seeing the touch, shall set 

51 apart the thing touched, seven days. And if on the seventh 
day the touch be spread in the garment, or in the web, or in 
the skin, into whatever things the skins may be made up, the 

52 touch is an inveterate leprosy. He must burn the garment, 
or the web, whether made of linen thread, or woollen yarn, or 
whatever the thing be which is made of skin, in which there is 
a touch of the leprosy. Because it is touched with leprosy, it 

53 shall be burned with fire. But if the priest find that the touch 
is not spread in the garment, or web, or vessel, whatever it be, 
made of skin ; the priest shall order that which hath the touch 

54 to be washed, and the priest shall set it apart seven days more. 

55 And if upon viewing the touch after it hath been washed, the 
priest see that the touch hath not changed its appearance, 
though it hath not spread, it is unclean, and must be burned 

56 with fire. It is fixed in the garment, or web. But if the priest 
see that the touch is of a brownish colour after beino: washed, 
he shall tear it out of the garment, or web, or out of the skin. 

57 And if it appear any more in the garment, or web, or in the 
leathern vessel, whatever it be, it is a fretting leprosy ; that in 

58 which the touch is, shall be burned with fire. Now the gar- 
ment, or web, or any thing made of skin, which shall be wash- 
ed, and from which the touch shall depart, shall be washed a 

59 second time with water, and it shall be clean. This is the law 
of the touch of a leprosy, in a woollen or hempen garment, or 
web, or any vessel made of skin, to pronounce it clean, or un- 
clean. 

XIV. Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, This is the law 

2 of the leper. Whenever he is cleansed he shall be brought be- 

3 fore the priest. The priest shall go out of the camp; and if 
upon looking, the priest see that the touch of the leprosy is 

4 healed in the leper, the priest shall give orders, and they shall 
take from him who is cleansed, two clean live birds, and cedar 

vol. I. a a 



!-!-! XIV. LEVITICUS. 

5 wood, and scarlet yarn, and hyssop ; and the priest shall give 
orders, and they shall kill one live bird, over spring water, in 

6 an earthen vessel. Then he shall take the living bird, and the 
cedar wood, and the scarlet yarn, and the hyssop, and dip them, 
and the living bird, in the blood of the bird which was killed over 

7 the spring water, and sprinkle some of it seven times on him who 
is cleansed from the leprosy, and he shall be clean. Then he shall 

8 let the live bird go into the field. And he who is cleansed shall 
wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and wash himself with 
water ; and he shall be clean ; and after this he may come into the 
camp ; but he must tarry abroad, out of his own house, seven days. 

6 And on the seventh day he shall shave off all the hair on his 
head, and beard, and his eye brows ; and having shaved off all 
his hair, he shall wash his clothes, and wash his body with water, 

10 and he shall be clean. And on the eighth day he shall take 
two male lambs, of the first year, without blemish, and three 
tenths of fine flour, tempered with oil, for a sacrifice, and one 

11 cotulus of oil; and the priest who pronounceth him clean shall 
set the man who is cleansed, and these things, before the Lord, at 

12 the door of the tabernacle of the testimony ; and the priest shall 
take one of the male lambs, and offer it for a trespass offering, 
with the cotulus of cil, and set them apart as a dedication be- 

13 fore the Lord ; (Now they shall kill the lamb in the place where 
they kill the whole burnt offerings and the sin offerings — in a 
holy place) for as is the sin offering, so is the trespass offering, 

14 for the priest. They are most holy. And the priest shall 
take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and the priest 
shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him who is cleansed, 
and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of 

15 his right foot. Then taking some of the cotulus of oil, the priest 

16 shall pour it into his own left hand, and he shall dip his right 
finger into the oil which is in his left hand, and sprinkle it with 

17 his finger before the Lord seven times. And the rest of the 
oil which is in his left hand the priest shall put on the tip of 
the right ear of him who is cleansed, and on the thumb of his 
right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot on the place of 

18 the blood of the trespass offering. And the oil still left in his 
hand the priest shall put on the head of him who is cleansed. 
So shall the priest make atonement for him before the Lord. 



!-!-! XIV. LEVITICUS. 

19 Then the priest shall prepare the sin offering, and make atonement 
for him who is cleansed, with his sin offering, and after that the 

20 priest shall kill the whole burnt offering. And the priest shall 
offer up the whole burnt offering, and the sacrifice of flour, on 
the altar. So shall the priest make atonement for him, and he 

21 shall be cleansed. But if he be poor, and not of ability to fur- 
nish this, he shall take one lamb for the trespass which he hath 
committed, that it may be set apart as a dedication, so that atone- 
ment may be made for him, and a tenth of fine flour tempered 

22 with oil for a sacrifice, and a cotulus of oil, and two turtle doves, 
or two young pigeons, which ever he can find most readily, the 
one for a sin offering, and the other for a whole burnt offering. 

23 Arid on the eighth day he shall bring these to the priest, that 
he may cleanse him, to the door of the tabernacle of the testi- 

24 mony before the Lord. And the priest having taken the lamb 
of the trespass offering, and the cotulus of oil, shall set them 

25 apart as a dedication before the Lord. And he shall kill the 
lamb of the trespass offering, and the priest shall take some of 
the blood of the trespass offering, and put it on the tip of the 
right ear of him who is cleansed, and on the thumb of his right 

26 hand, and on the great toe of his right foot ; then pouring some 
of the oil into his own left hand, the priest shall sprinkle, with 

27 his right finger, some of the oil in his left hand, seven times be- 

28 fore the Lord. And the priest shall put some of the oil in his 
hand on the tip of the right ear of him who is cleansed, and 
on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his 
right foot, on the place of the blood of the trespass offering ; 

29 and shall put the oil remaining in his hand, on the head of 
him who is cleansed ; so having made atonement for him 

oO before the Lord, the priest shall offer one of the turtle doves, 

31 or one of the young pigeons, as his hand hath found, the 
one for a sin offering, and the other for a whole burnt offer - 

32 ing, with the sacrifice of flour. So shall the priest make 
atonement for him who is cleansed. This is the law for him 
on whom there is a touch of the leprosy, and who is not of abi- 
lity to furnish the other offerings for his purification. 

33 Then the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, When 

34 you are come to the land of the Chananites which I give you 
for a possession, and I send a touch of a leprosy on the houses 



Oh. XIV. LEVITICUS. 

35 of the laud which you possess, the owner of the house shall 
come and tell the priest, saying, Something like a touch hath 

3G appeared to me in the house. Upon this the priest shall order 
the house to be unfurnished, before he goeth in to view the 
touch, that what is in the house may not be made unclean. 
And this being done, the priest shall go in to examine the 

37 house. And if, upon viewing the touch, he see that there is a 
touch in the walls of the house, and he seeth the cavities of a 
reddish or greenish colour, which appear to be deep in the wall ; 

38 upon coming out of the house, at the door of the house, the 

39 priest shall sequestrate the house for seven days. And on the 
seventh day the priest shall come again and view the house : 
And if he seeth that the touch hath spread in the walls of the 

40 house, the priest shall order them to take out the stones in which 
is the touch, and to carry them out of the city to an unclean place, 

41 and to scrape the house on the inside round about, and pour 
out the dust which is scraped off, without the city, into an un- 

42 clean place. And they shall take other stones, well scraped, and 
put them in the place of those stones, and take other mortar, and 

43 plaister the house. And if the touch come again, and break out 
in the house after they have taken away the stones, and after 
the house hath been scraped, and after it hath been plaistered ; 

44 the priest shall go in and take a view ; and if the touch hath 
spread in the house, it is an inveterate leprosy in the house. It 

45 is unclean. They shall therefore demolish the house, and carry 
the wood thereof, and the stones thereof, and the rubbish thereof, 

46 out of the city to an unclean place. Now he who goeth into 
the house, all the while it is sequestrated, shall be unclean till 

47 the evening. And he who sleepeth in the house shall wash his 
clothes, and be unclean until the evening : And he who eateth 
in the house shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even- 

48 ing. But when the priest shall come, and go in, if upon taking 
a view he seeth that the touch hath not spread in the house, after 
being plaistered, the priest shall pronounce the house clean, 

49 because the touch is healed. And in order to cleanse the house, 
he shall take two clean live birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet 
yarn, and hyssop. And he shall kill one of the birds, over spring- 
Si water, in an earthen vessel. Then he shall take the cedar wood, 

and the scarlet yarn, and the hyssop, and the Jiving bird, and 



!-!-! XY. LEVITICUS. 

dip them in the blood of the bird which was killed over spring 

52 water, and with them sprinkle the house seven times, and 
cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the 
spring water, and with the living bird, and with the hyssop, and 

53 with the scarlet yam. Then he shall send away the live bird 
out of the city into the open field. So shall he make atone- 
ment for the house, and it shall be clean. 

54 This is the law for every touch of a leprosy and scald, and 
of the leprosy in a garment, and a house, and of a boil, and a 
scar, and the bright spot ; and to teach when a thing is un- 
clean, and when it is to be pronounced clean. This is the law 
of the leprosy. 

XV. Again the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 

2 Speak to the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man 

3 hath an efflux from his body ; because of his efflux he is un- 
clean, and this is the law touching his uncleanness. 

If his efflux be a gonorrhea, this is an uncleanness in him. 
So long as his gonorrhea continueth, it is his uncleanness. 

4 Every bed on which such a one lieth is unclean ; and every 

5 seat whereon he shall sit, shall be unclean. And whoever shall 
touch his bed must wash his clothes, and wash himself with wa- 

6 ter, and shall be unclean until the evening. And whoever sit- 
teth on the seat whereon he sat, shall wash his clothes, and wash 

7 himself with water, and be unclean until the evening. And 
whoever toucheth his flesh, shall wash his clothes, and wash 

8 himself with water, and be unclean until the evening. And if 
he spit on one who is clean, the person who was clean shall 
wash his clothes, and wash himself with water, and be unclean 

9 until the evening. And every saddle of an ass on which he shall 

10 ride, shall be unclean until evening. And whoever toucheth 
any things which were under him, shall be unclean until even- 
ing. And whoever carrieth them shall wash his clothes, and wash 

11 himself with water, and be unclean until evening. And every 
one whom he who hath the gonorrhea toucheth, without wash- 
ing his hands, shall wash his clothes, and wash himself witli 

12 water, and be unclean until evening. And every earthen ves- 
sel which he shall touch shall be broken ; but a vessel of wood 

L5 shall be washed with water, and shall be clean. And when he 
is clean of his disorder, he shall reckon for himself seven days 



!-!-! XV. LEVITICUS. 

for his purification, and he shall wash his clothes, and wash his 

14 body with water, and he shall be clean. And on the eighth 
day he shall take him two turtle doves, or two young pigeons, 
and bring them before the Lord, to the door of the tabernacle 

15 of the testimony, and give them to the priest. And the priest 
shall offer one of them for a sin offering, and the other for a 
whole burnt offering. So shall the priest make atonement for 
him before the Lord, on the account of his efflux. 

16 And if any man's seed go from him by copulation, he shall 
wash his whole body with water, and be unclean until even- 

17 ing. And every garment, and every skin on which the seminal 
matter may be, shall be washed with water, and be unclean 

18 until the evening. And with respect to a woman, if any man 
lie carnally with her, they shall wash themselves with water, 

19 and be unclean until the evening. And if any woman hath an 
efflux, and it be in her body, she shall confine herself seven 
days to her peculiar seat. Every one who touch eth her shall 

20 be unclean until the evening. And every thing on which she 
lieth during her state of separation, shall be unclean ; and every 

21 thing on which she shall sit, shall be unclean. And whoever 
toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and wash himself with 

22 water, and be unclean until evening. And whoever toucheth 
any thing on which she sat, shall wash his clothes, and wash 

23 himself with water, and be unclean until evening. Whether 
she be in bed, or on any seat whereon she may sit, when one 

24 toucheth her, he shall be unclean until evening. But if any one 
lie down by her, and her uncleanness is upon him, he shall be 
unclean seven days ; and every bed on which he may lie, shall 

25 be unclean. And if any woman hath an efflux of blood many 
days, out of the time of her separation ; or if it continue be- 
yond the time of her separation, all the days of this issue of 

26 uncleanness, shall be like the days of her separation. She shall 
be unclean ; and every bed on which she may lie during this 
issue, shall be to her like her bed of separation. And every 
seat on which she may sit, shall be unclean according to the 

27 uncleanness of her separate state. Every one who toucheth her 
shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and wash his body 

28 with water, and be unclean until evening. And when she is 
clear of her disorder she shall reckon for herself seven days, 



Oh. XVI. LEVITICUS. 

29 and after that she shall be clean. And on the eighth day she 
shall take two turtle doves, or two young pigeons, and carry 
them to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the testi- 

30 mony. And the priest shall offer one of them for a sin offering, 
and the other for a whole burnt offering ; and the priest shall 
make atonement for her before the Lord, on the account of her 

31 uncleanness. Thus shall you make the children of Israel reli- 
giously careful to guard against their uncleannesses, that they 
may not die for their uncleanness — for defiling my tabernacle 
which is among them. 

32 This is the law for him who hath a gonorrhea, and for him 
whose seed goeth from him so as to be defiled thereby ; and 

33 for her who is menstruous; and for the emission of seed be- 
tween a man and a woman ; and for a man who lieth by a wo- 
man; in her state of separation. 

XVI. And the Lord spoke to Moses after the death of the two 
sons of Aaron : when they brought strange fire before the Lord, 

2 and were dead, the Lord said to Moses, Speak to Aaron thy 
brother, and let him not come at all times into the sanctuary, 
within the veil, into the presence of the propitiatory, which is 
on the ark of the testimony ; that he may not die. For in a 
cloud I will appear on the propitiatory. In this manner Aaron 

3 shall come into that holy place. With a young bull from the 
herd for a sin offering [he shall bring] a ram for a whole burnt 

4 offering. And he shall put on a holy linen vesture, and shall 
have linen drawers on his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen 
girdle, and shall put on a linen tiara. These are holy garments, 
therefore he shall wash his whole body with water, and put them 

5 on. And he shall take, from the congregation of the children 
of Israel, two he goats for a sin offering, and a ram for a whole 

6 burnt offering. And Aaron shall offer the young bull for his 
own sin offering, and make atonement for himself and his house- 

7 hold. Then he shall take the two he goats, and present them 
before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony. 

8 And Aaron shall cast lots on the goats, one lot, " For the 

9 Lord" and one lot, " For escajje." And Aaron shall bring 
forward the goat, on which the lot, " For the Lord " fell ; and 

10 shall offer it for a sin offering, but the goat, on which the lot, 



Oh. XYI. LEVITICUS. 

" For escape," fell, he shall present alive before the Lord, to make 
atonement on it, so as to let it escape ; and he shall send it 
away into the wilderness. 

11 Then Aaron shall bring forward the young bull for his 
own sin offering, to make atonement for himself and his house- 

12 hold, and shall slay the young bull for his sin offering ; and 
he shall take a censer full of coals of fire from the altar, which 
is before the Lord, and he shall fill his hands with the com- 

13 pound incense, beaten fine, and carry it within the veil; and he 
shall put the incense on the fire before the Lord ; and the 
smoke of this incense shall cover the propitiatory which is on 

14 the testimonies, and he shall not die. Then he shall take some 
of the blood of the bull, and sprinkle it with his finger on the 
propitiatory, on the east side. In front of the propitiatory he 
shall sprinkle some of the blood seven times with his finger. 

15 Then he shall kill the goat for a sin offering — that for the peo- 
ple, before the Lord, and he shall carry some of its blood with- 
in the veil, and do with the blood thereof as he did with the 
blood of the bull, and sprinkle the blood thereof on the pro- 

16 pitiatory, in front of the propitiatory, and make atonement for 
the holy place on account of the uncleanness of the children of 
Israel, and on account of their transgressions, for all their sins. 
While he shall be doing this in the tabernacle of the testimo- 
ny, which is built among them in the midst of their unclean- 

17 ness, there shall be no other man in the tabernacle of the testi- 
mony, from the time of his going in to make an atonement in 
the holy place, until he come out. And when he shall have 
made atonement for himself, and his household, and for all the 

18 congregation of the children of Israel, he shall come out to the 
altar which is before the Lord, and make atonement on it. He 
shall take some of the blood of the bull, and some of the blood 
of the goat, and put it on the horns of the altar round about, 

19 and sprinkle some of the blood against it seven times with his 
finger, and purify it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the 

20 children of Israel. And when he hath finished making atone- 
ment for the sanctuary, and for the tabernacle of the testimony, 
and the altar, and hath made purification for the priests, then 

21 he shall bring forward the living goat, and Aaron shall lay his 
hands on the head of the live goat, and over it make confession 



Oh. XVI. LEVITICUS. 

of all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and of all their 
transgressions, and all their sins, and lay them on the head of 
the live goat, and send him away by the hand of a man ready 

22 for the purpose, into the wilderness. And the goat shall bear 

23 away upon him their iniquities to an untrodden land. And 
having sent away the goat into the wilderness, Aaron shall go 
into the tabernacle of the testimony, and put off his linen rai- 
ment which he had on when he went into the holy place, and 

24 shall lay it up there. And he shall wash his body with water, 
in a holy place, and put on his robe, and come forth, and offer 
his own whole burnt offering, and the whole burnt offering of 
the people, and made atonement for himself and his household, 

25 and for the people, as well as for the priests ; and shall offer up 
2(3 the suet of the sin offerings on the altar. And he who letteth 

go the he-goat which was sent away to be set at liberty, shall 
wash his clothes, and wash his body with water, and after that 

27 come into the camp. And they shall carry forth out of the 
camp the bull for the sin offering, and the goat for the sin of- 
fering, the blood of which was carried in to make atonement 
in the holy place, and shall burn them with fire, both the skins, 

28 and the flesh, and the dung thereof. And he who burneth them 
shall wash his clothes and wash his body with water, and after 

29 that he shall come into the camp. And this shall be to you an 
everlasting rite. In the seventh month, on the tenth day of the 
month, you shall humble your souls, and do no work, whether 

30 native or the proselyte who dwelleth among you ; for on that day 
he shall make atonement for you, to purify you from all your 

31 sins before the Lord, that you may be cleansed. This rest 
shall be to you a sabbath of sabbaths, and you shall humble 

32 your souls. It is an everlasting statute. That priest shall make 
the atonement, who shall be anointed, and whose hands shall 

33 be consecrated to officiate as priest after his father. And he 
shall put on the linen raiment — the holy raiment, and shall 
make an atonement for the holy sanctuary, and for the taber- 
nacle of the testimony, and he shall make atonement for the 
altar ; and he shall make atonement for the priests, and for all 
the congregation. And the making this atonement for the chil- 
dren of Israel, for all their sins, shall be to you an everlasting 

vol. i. B b 



!-!-! XVII. LEVITICUS. 

statute. It shall be made once a year, as the Lord command- 
ed Moses. 
XVII. Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to 
Aaron and his sons, and to all the sons of Israel, and thou shalt 

2 say unto them, This is the thing which the Lord hath com- 

3 manded, saying, Be the man who he may of the children of 
Israel, or of the proselytes who dwell among you, who shall 
kill a young bull, or a sheep, or a goat, in the camp, or who 

4: shall kill any of them out of the camp, and not bring it to the 
door of the tabernacle of the testimony, that it may be offered 
for a whole burnt offering, or for a thank offering to the Lord, 
to be accepted for a smell of fragrance — even though he kill it 
without the camp, if he bring it not to the door of the taberna- 
cle of the testimony, that it may be offered as a gift to the 
Lord, before the tabernacle of the Lord, blood shall be imput- 
ed to that man. He hath shed blood ; that person shall be cut 

5 off from among his people. In order that the children of Israel 
may offer up their sacrifices, whatever they kill in the fields they 
shall carry for the Lord to the doors of the tabernacle of the 
testimony, to the priest, and offer them as a sacrifice of thanks- 

6 giving to the Lord ; and the priest shall pour the blood against 
the altar round about, before the Lord, at the doors of the ta- 
bernacle of the testimony ; and offer up the suet for a smell of 

7 fragrance for the Lord. And they shall no more offer their sa- 
crifices to vanities after which they go a whoring. It shall be a 

8 perpetual statute for you throughout your generations. There- 
fore thou shalt say unto them, Be the man who he may of the 
children of Israel, or of the children of the proselytes who 
dwell among you, who shall offer a whole burnt offering, or a 

9 sacrifice of flour, and not bring it to the door of the tabernacle 
of the testimony, that it may be offered to the Lord, that man 

10 shall be cut off from among his people. And be the man who 
he may of the children of Israel, or of the proselytes who 
dwell among you, who shall eat any blood, I will set my face 
against that person who eateth blood, and destroy him from 

1 1 among his people. For the blood is the life of all flesh ; and I 
have given it to you to make atonement on the altar for your 

12 souls. For the blood shall make atonement for souls. For this 
cause I have said to the children of Israel, No person among 



Oh. XYIII. LEVITICUS. 

you shall eat blood, even the proselyte who dwelleth among you 

13 shall not eat blood. And be the man who he may of the chil- 
dren of Israel, or of the proselytes who dwell among yon, who 
in hunting shall catch a wild beast, or a bird, which may be 
eaten, he shall pour out the blood, and cover it in the ground. 

14 For its blood is the life of all flesh, therefore I have said to the 
children of Israel, you shall not eat the blood of any flesh. Be- 
cause its blood is the life of all flesh, every one who eateth it 

1 5 shall be cut off. And every person who eateth that which hath 
died of itself, or been caught by wild beasts, whether he be 
one of yourselves, or of the proselytes, shall wash his clothes, 
and wash himself with water, and be unclean until evening. 

1G Then he shall be clean. But if he do not wash his clothes, and 

if his body be not washed with water, he shall bear his iniquity. 

XVIII. Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 

3 children of Israel ; and thou shalt say unto them, I the Lord 
am your God; you shall not do according to the customs of 
Egypt, in which you sojourned ; nor shall you do according 
to the customs of the land of Chanaan, to which I am leading 

4 you ; you shall not walk by their ordinances. You shall exe- 
cute my judgments, and keep my statutes, and walk by them ; 

5 I the Lord am your Grod, therefore you shall keep all my com- 
mandments, and all my judgments, and execute them, which 

if a man do he shall live thereby. I the Lord am your (rod ; 
no man, be he who he may, shall approach to near relations of 

7 his own flesh to uncover their nakedness. I am the Lord ; the 
nakedness of thy father, that is the nakedness of thy mother, 
thou shalt not uncover ; for she is thy mother, thou shalt not 

8 uncover her nakedness. The nakedness of thy father's wife 

9 thou shalt not uncover ; for it is thy father's nakedness. The 
nakedness of thy sister by the same father or by the same 
mother, whether born at home or born abroad, their nakedness 

10 thou shalt not uncover. The nakedness of thy son's daughter, 
or of thy daughter's daughter, their nakedness thou shalt not 

1 1 uncover, for it is thy own nakedness. The nakedness of the 
daughter of thy father's wife thou shalt not uncover ; being of 
the same father she is thy sister : thou shalt not uncover her 

12 nakedness. The nakedness of thy father's sister thou shalt not 

13 uncover, for she is thy father's near kinswoman. The naked- 



!-!-! XVIII. LEVITICUS. 

ness of thy mother's sister thou shalt not uncover ; for she is 

14 thy mother's near kinswoman. The nakedness of thy father's 
brother thou shalt not uncover ; thou shalt not go in unto his 

15 wife for she is thy near relation. The nakedness of thy daugh- 
ter in law thou shalt not uncover ; for she is thy son's wife, 

16 thou shalt not uncover her nakedness. The nakedness of thy 
brother's wife thou shalt not uncover, it is the nakedness of 

17 thy brother. The nakedness of a wife and of her daughter 
thou shalt not uncover. Thou shalt not take thy son's daugh- 
ter, nor thy daughter's daughter to uncover their nakedness ; 

18 for they are thy near kinswomen. It is wickedness. In addi- 
tion to a sister thou shalt not take to wife a rival sister to un- 

19 cover her nakedness while her sister is still living. And thou 
shalt not approach to a wife during the time of her separation 

20 for uncleanness, to uncover her nakedness : and with thy 
neighbour's wife thou shall not lie carnally to defile thyself with 

21 her. Thou shalt not give any of thy seed to serve an Archon ; 

22 nor shalt thou profane the holy name J the Lord. Thou shalt 
not lie with a man as with a woman ; for it is an abomination. 

23 Nor shalt thou lie with any beast to pollute thyself with it ; nor 
shall a woman be exposed to any beast to be pressed by it ; for 

21 it is horrible. Be not polluted with any such things ; for with 
all such things have those nations been polluted, which I drive 

25 out before you, and the land hath been polluted, and for its 
sake I have retributed to them their iniquity, and the land is 

26 become a mortal enemy to them who dwell therein. You there- 
fore shall keep all my institutions and all my ordinances ; and 
none of you, neither the native, nor the proselyte who dwelleth 

27 among you, shall commit any of these abominations, which 
the men of the country who were before you have committed, 

28 and by which the land hath been polluted ; that the land may 
not become a mortal enemy to you when you pollute it ; as it 

29 hath been to those nations which were before you. For who- 
ever shall commit any of these abominations, the persons who 
shall commit them shall be cut off from among their people- 

30 Therefore you shall keep my ordinances that you may not 
practise any of these abominable customs, which were prac- 
tised before you. You shall not pollute yourselves with them ; 
for I the Lord am your God. 



Ck. XIX. LEVITICUS. 

XIX. Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 
congregation of the children of Israel ; and thon shalt say un- 

2 to them, You shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy. 

3 Let every one reverence his father and his mother. And you 
shall keep my sabbaths. I am the Lord your God ; you shall not 

4 follow idols, nor make for yourselves molten gods. I the Lord 
am your God; therefore when you offer a sacrifice of thanks- 
giving to the Lord, you shall offer it in an acceptable manner. 

6 On the day you offer such a sacrifice it shall be eaten ; or on 
the next day ; and if any of it be left till the third day, it shall 

7 be burned with fire. And if it be eaten on the third day, it is 

8 as if it had not been offered. It will not be accepted. He who 
eateth it will contract guilt, because he hath profaned the holy 
things of the Lord. The persons therefore who eat it shall be 

9 cut off from among their people. And when you gather in the 
harvest of your land, you shall not make a com pleat ingathering 

10 of the harvest of your field, nor gather up the gleanings of thy 
harvest ; nor shalt thou go over thy vineyard a second time, nor 
gather the straggling clusters of thy vineyard. Thou shalt leave 

11 them for the poor, and for the stranger. I am the Lord your 
God ; you shall not steal ; you shall not lie ; nor shall any one 

12 accuse his brother for trifles, you shall not swear by my name 
to a falsehood ; nor profane the holy name of your God. 

13 I am the Lord your God, thou shalt nut injure thy neigh- 
bour, nor commit rapine ; nor shall the wages of a hireling re- 

II main with thee till the morning. Thou shalt not curse the 
deaf, nor lay a stumbling block before the blind, but shalt fear 
the Lord thy God. 

15 I am the Lord your God ; you shall not do an unjust thing 
in the execution of justice : thou shalt not respect the face of 

16 the poor, nor revere the face of the mighty. With righteous- 
ness thou shalt judge thy neighbour. Thou shalt not go about 
with deceit among thy nation, nor set thyself against the blood 
of thy neighbour. 

17 I am the Lord your God ; thou shalt not hate thy brother 
in thy heart. With rebuke thou shalt correct thy neighbour, 
and not contract guilt on his account ; but let not thy hand take 

18 vengeance. Thou shalt not bear a grudge against the children 



!-!-! XIX. LEVITICUS. 

of thy people ; but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. I 
am the Lord ; you shall keep my law. 

19 Thou shalt not let the cattle gender with one of another 
kind, nor plant thy vineyard with different sorts of seed ; nor 
put on unscoured, a woven garment made of flax and wool. 

20 If any man lie carnally with a woman, and she be a servant 
betrothed to a man, and hath not been redeemed, nor had her 
freedom granted her, they shall be chastised, but shall not be 

21 put to death, because she was not set free. And for his tres- 
pass against the Lord, he shall bring to the door of the taber- 

22 nacle of the testimony, the ram of a trespass offering ; and the 
priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the tres- 
pass offering before the Lord for the sin which he hath com- 
mitted ; and the sin which he hath committed shall be forgiv- 
en him. 

23 Now .when [ you come into the land which the Lord your 
God giveth you, you may plant all sorts of trees for food ; but 

24 you must purge away their impurity. The fruit thereof shall 
be three years unclean to you, and shall not be eaten : and in 
the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be hallowed, to praise 

25 the Lord ; and in the fifth year, you may eat the fruit. The 
products thereof will be an additional supply to you. 

26 I am the Lord your God ; you must not eat od the moun- 

27 tains, nor practise divination, nor augury by birds. You shall 
not make a rounding of the hair of your head, nor disfigure 

28 the appearance of your beard. You shall not make gashes in 
your body for the dead, nor any fixed marks on you. 

29 I am the Lord your God; thou shalt not prostitute thy 
daughter to cause her to commit whoredom, that the country 
may not fall into whoredom ; and that the land may not be fil- 

30 led with iniquity. You shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence 
my holy things. 

3 1 I am the Lord your God : you shall not go after belly speak- 
ers, nor attach yourselves to sorcerers to be polluted by them. 

32 I am the Lord your God : you shall rise up before the 
hoary head, and honour the face of an elder, and fear thy God. 

33 I am the Lord your God ; if any stranger come among you 

34 in your land, you shall not afflict him. The stranger who 
cometh to you, shall be as one born among you ; and thou 



Oh. XX. LEVITICUS. 

shalt love him as thyself; for you were strangers in the land of 
Egypt. 

35 I am the Lord your God ; you shall not do id justice in the 
exercise of judgment, nor in measures, nor in weights, nor in 
balances. You shall have among you just balances, just weights 
and a just measure. 

36 I am the Lord your God who brought you out [of the land 
of Egypt, therefore you shall keep all my law and all my sta- 
tutes and do them. I am the Lord your God. 

XX. Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Thou shalt 

2 also say to the children of Israel, If any of the children of Is- 
rael, or of those who have become proselytes among Israel, 
shall give any of his seed to an Archon let him be put to death. 

3 The people of the land shall stone him with stones : and as for 
me I will myself set my face against that man, and destroy 
him from among his people, because he hath given of his seed 
to an Archon, to pollute my holy things, and to profane the 

4 name of those who have been hallowed to me. And though 
those born in the land may, upon seeing him, connive at that 

5 man when he giveth of his seed to an Archon, and not kill 
him, I will indeed set my face against that man, and against 
his family, and destroy him, and all who encourage him, to go 

6 a whoring after the Archons, from among their people. And 
with respect to the person who shall follow belly speakers and 
sorcerers, so as to go a whoring after them, I will set my face 
against that person, and destroy him from among his people. 

7 You shall therefore be holy, because I the Lord your God am 

8 holy. And you shall keep my statutes and do them. It is I 

9 the Lord who hallow you. Be the man who he may who cur- 
seth his father or his mother, let him be jmt to death. He hath 

10 cursed his father or his mother, he shall be held guilty. Who- 
soever committeth adultery with the wife of a man who is head 
of a family, or who shall commit adulter}' with the wife of his 
neighbour, let both the adulterer and the adulteress be put to 

11 death. And if any one lie with his father's wife he hath un- 
covered his father's nakedness, let them be put to death ; they 

12 are both guilty. And if any man lie with his daughter in law, 
let them both be put to death ; for they have committed wick- 

13 edness, and are guilty. And if any man lie with man as with 



!-!-! XX. LEVITICUS. 

14 woman, they have both committed an abomination ; lef> them 
be put to death. They are guilty. And if any man take to wife 
a mother and a daughter it is a violation of law, they shall 
burn him and them with fire that there may be no transgres- 

15 sing of law among you. And whoever shall lie with a beast, 

16 he shall be put to death, and you shall kill the beast. And if 
any woman approach to any beast to be pressed under it, you 
shall kill the woman and the beast. Let them be put to death. 

17 They are guilty. Whoever shall take his sister by the same 
father, or the same mother, and see her nakedness, and she see 
his ; it is a disgraceful act. They shall be excommunicated in 
the presence of the children of their family. He hath uncover- 

18 ed the nakedness of his sister. They shall bear their sin. And 
if any man lie with his wife during her infirmity, and uncover 
her nakedness, he hath uncovered her fountain, and she hath 
discovered her menstrual efflux ; they shall both be cut off 

19 from their family. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of 
thy father's sister or thy mother's sister ; for when one un- 

20 covereth his near of kin they shall bear their sin. Whoever 
hath lain with his near of kin, he hath uncovered the naked- 

21 ness of his near relation, they shall die childless. If a man take 
his brother's wife, it is an act of uncleanness. He hath un- 
covered the nakedness of his brother ; they shall die childless. 

22 You shall keep all my statutes and my judgments and do them, 
that the land to which I am leading you to dwell therein, may 

23 not become your mortal enemy. You must not walk in the 
customs of the nations which I drive out from before you. 

24 Because they did all these things, therefore I held them in ab- 
horrence, and said to you, You shall inherit their land, and I 
will give it to you for a possession — a land flowing with milk 

25 and honey. I am the Lord your God, who have separated you 
from all the nations, you shall therefore keep yourselves sepa- 
rate by making a distinction between the clean beasts, and the 
beasts which are unclean; and between the clean birds, and 
the birds which are unclean ; and you shall not pollute your- 
selves with the beasts, or the birds, or any of the reptiles of the 
earth which I have distinguished for you, by uncleanness, and 

26 you shall be consecrated to me. Because I the Lord your God 
am the Holy One, who hath separated you from all the na- 



Oh. XXI. LEVITICUS. 

tions, that you should be mine, therefore the man, or the wo- 
man, among you, who hath become a belly speaker, or a sor- 
cerer, shall be put to death. Stone them with stones. They are 
guilty. 
XXL Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 
priests, the sons of Aaron, and thou shalt say unto them, They 
must not defile themselves for the dead in their family, except 

2 only for their nearest of kin. For a father, or a mother, or for 

3 sons, or daughters, or for a brother, and for a virgin sister who 
dwelleth with him, and who hath not been betrothed to a hus- 

4 band ; for these he may defile himself. He must not defile him- 

5 self unexpectedly among his jDeople, to occasion their defile- 
ment. You shall not shave the head to make it bald, for the 
dead. Nor shall they shave their beard, nor make gashes in 

6 their flesh. They shall be consecrated to their God, and shall 
not profane the name of their God, for they are to offer up the 
sacrifices of the Lord — the gifts to their God ; therefore they 

7 shall be holy. They shall not take to wife a harlot, nor a wo- 
man who hath been defiled, nor a woman divorced from her 
husband. Because he is consecrated to the Lord his God, 

8 therefore thou shalt hallow him. He offereth up the gifts of the 
Lord your God, he shall be hallowed. Because I the Lord am 

9 the holy one who halloweth them, therefore if the daughter of 
a priest profane herself by whoredom, she profaneth the name 

10 of her father, she shall be burned with fire. And with regard 
to the priest, who is great above his brethren, the oil of the 
anointed one having been poured on his head, and he having 
been consecrated to put on the garments, he must not take the 

11 tiara from his head, nor rend his garments, nor go near any 

12 dead person, nor defile himself for his father, nor for his mo- 
ther, nor go out of the holy places, nor defile the sanctuary of 
his God ; because the holy oil, the anointing of his God, is up- 

1 3 on him. I am the Lord. He shall take to wife a virgin of his 

14 own family. A widow, or a woman divorced or defiled, or a 

15 harlot, these he shall not take. He shall take none to wife, but 
a virgin of his own tribe ; and he shall not profane his seed 
among his people. It is I the Lord who hallow him. 

1G Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Say to Aaron, 
17 be the man who he may of thy family, throughout your gene- 
vol. i. C c 



!-!-! XXIT. LEVITICUS. 

rations, who hath any blemish about him, he shall not come 

18 near to present the gifts of his God. No man who hath any 
blemish, who is blind, or lame, or hath a hare lip, or a slit ear ; 

19 nor any man who hath a contortion in the hand, or a splay foot, 

20 or who is hump backed, or dim sighted, or blear eyed, nor any 

21 man who hath the scurvy, or the itch, or a rupture — No per- 
son of the seed of Aaron the priest, who hath any blemish about 
him, shall come near to offer the sacrifices of thy God. Be- 
cause he hath a blemish he shall not come near to offer the gifts 

22 of God. With regard to the gifts of God, even the most holy, 

23 of these he may eat ; but he shall not approach to the veil, nor 
come near to the altar, because he hath a blemish. And he shall 
not profane the sanctuary of his God, because I am the Lord 

24 who halloweth them. 

XXII. And when Moses had spoken to Aaron and his sons, and 

2 to all the children of Israel, then the Lord spoke to Moses, say- 
ing, Speak to Aaron and his sons and let them take heed not 
to profane my holy name, in respect to any of the holy things 
of the children of Israel, which they dedicate to me. I am the 

3 Lord ; say unto them, What man soever of your seed, through- 
out your generations, shall come near to the holy things which 
the children of Israel may dedicate to the Lord, and have any 
uncleanness upon him, that person shall be cut off from me. 

4 I am the Lord your God ; though a man be of the seed of Aaron 
the priest, yet if he be a leper, or hath a gonorrhea, he shall 
not eat of the holy things until he be cleansed. And with re- 
spect to him who toucheth any uncleanness of the dead, or the 
man from whom seminal matter may proceed ; or who may 

5 touch any unclean reptile which may defile him ; or any man, 
by whom he may be defiled, whatever his uncleanness may be ; 

6 the person who shall touch such things shall be unclean until 
evening. He shall not eat of the holy things unless he wash 

7 his body with water, and the sun be set. When he shall be 
clean, then he may eat of the holy things ; for it is his food. 

8 What died of itself, or is torn by wild beasts, he shall not eat 

9 to pollute himself therewith. I am the Lord, therefore they 
shall keep my statutes, that they may not, on the account of 

10 those things, contract guilt, and die because of them, when 
they profane them. 



Ok. XXII. LEVITICUS. 

I am the Lord, the God who halloweth them, therefore 
none of another family shall eat the holy things, nor shall he, who 
sojourneth with a priest, or who is hired by him, eat of them. 

11 But if the priest shall have a person bought with money, this 
person may eat of his food. And they who are born in his fa- 

12 mily may eat of his food. But if the daughter of a priest be 
married to a man of another family, she shall not eat of the 

13 dedications of the sanctuary. But if the daughter of a priest 
become a widow, or be divorced, and have no issue, she may 
return to her father's house as in her youth, and eat of her fa- 

14 ther's food : But none of another family shall eat thereof. And 
whoever shall eat of the holy things through inadvertence, he 
shall add a fifth to it, and give the holy thing to the priest. 

15 Thus the priests will not profane the holy things of the chil- 

16 dren of Israel, which they set apart for the Lord, nor bring 
upon themselves the guilt of a trespass, when they eat their 
holy things, for I am the Lord who hallow them. 

17 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to Aaron 
and his sons, and to the whole congregation of Israel, and thou 

18 shalt say unto them, Be the man who he may of the children 
of Israel, or of the proselytes who dwell among them in Israel, 
who shall bring his gifts according to any vow they may have 
made, or according to any determination they may have come 

19 to, whatever they bring for a whole burnt offering to God, 
must, in order to be accepted for you, be males without blem- 

20 ish, from the herd, or from the sheep, or from the goats. What 
hath any blemish in it they shall not bring to the Lord ; for it 

21 will not be accepted for you. And whoever shall bring a sacri- 
fice of thanksgiving to the Lord, either in discharge of a vow, 
or as a free will offering, or at your festivals, from the herd 
or from the flock, it must, in order to its being accepted, be 

22 without blemish. There must be no blemish in it. That which 
is blind, or bruised, or which hath its tongue cut, or hath been 
eaten by ants, or is infected with scurvy or mange — these they 
shall not bring to the Lord, nor shall you give any such for an 

23 offering of homage on the altar to the Lord. A young bull, or 
a sheep which hath its ear cropped, or its tail cut, these thou 
mayst slaughter for thyself; but in discharge of thy vow they 

24 will not be accepted. What are castrated by crushing, bruis- 



!-!-! XXIII. LEVITICUS. 

ing, cutting or extracting — these thou shalt not bring to the 

25 Lord, nor shall you make an offering of them in your land, nor 
from the hand of a stranger bring any such forward as gifts for 
your God. Because there is a defect in them — a blemish in 
them ; they will not be accepted for you. 

26 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, With respect 

27 to a young bull, or a sheep, or a goat, when it is brought forth, 
it must be seven days under its dam, and on the eighth day, 
and thenceforward, it will be accepted as a gift for an homage 

28 offering to the Lord. But whether it be a young bull, or a lamb, 
thou must not kill the dam and the young on the same day. 

29 And if thou wilt offer a sacrifice — a vow of joy, to the Lord, 
in order that you may offer it acceptably, it must be eaten on 

30 the same day. You shall not leave any of the flesh of it till the 

31 next morning. I am the Lord, therefore you shall keep these 

32 my commands, and do them ; And you shall not profane the 
name of the Holy One ; so shall I be hallowed in the midst of 

33 the children of Israel. I am the Lord, who am hallowing you, 
who am bringing you out of the land of Egypt, to be your 
God. I am the Lord. 

XXIII. Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 

2 children of Israel, and thou shalt say unto them, With respect 
to the festivals of the Lord, which you shall proclaim holy, set 

3 days, — these are my festivals. Six days thou shalt perform 
works, but on the seventh day are sabbaths, a solemn rest de- 
dicated to the Lord, thou shalt not do any work. Sabbaths are 

4 for the Lord in all your dwellings. These are the festivals for 
the Lord — holy, set days, which you shall proclaim in their set 

5 times. In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, 

6 between the two evenings, is the passover for the Lord. And 
on the fifteenth day of this month beginneth the festival of un- 

7 leavened bread for the Lord. Seven days you shall eat un- 
leavened bread. Now the first day shall be a holy, set day for 

8 you. You shall do no sacrificial service, but offer whole burnt 
offerings to the Lord seven days, and the seventh day shall be 
a holy set day for you. You shall do no sacrificial service. 

9 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 
10 children of Israel, and thou shalt say unto them, When you are 

come into the land which I give you, and are about to reap the 



!-!-! XXIII. LEVITICUS. 

harvest thereof, you shall bring a sheaf, as the first fruits of 

11 your harvest, to the priest, and he shall offer up the sheaf be- 
fore the Lord, to be accepted for you — On the morrow after 

12 the first day, the priest shall offer this up. And on the day when 
you bring the sheaf, you shall prepare a lamb without blemish^ 
of the first year, for a whole burnt offering for the Lord, and 

13 for the sacrifice thereof, two tenths of fine flour, made up with 
oil for the Lord, a smell of fragrance for the Lord — and for 

14 the libation thereof, the fourth of an hin of wine. You shall 
not eat bread, nor parched grains, of the new corn, till this 
day — until you have offered these gifts to your God. It is an 
everlasting statute for your generations, in all your dwellings, 

15 That from the morrow of these sabbaths — from the day on 
which you offer up the dedicated sheaf, you shall reckon for 
yourselves seven whole weeks, even till the morrow after the 

16 last week, you shall reckon fifty days, and then offer a sacri- 

17 flee of new corn to the Lord. You shall bring from your dwell- 
ing two loaves, as loaves of dedication. They shall consist of 
two tenths of fine flour. Being of the first fruits for the Lord, 

18 they shall be baked with leaven. And with the loaves you shall 
present seven lambs of the first year, without blemish, and one 
young bull from the herd, and two rams without blemish ; and 
they shall be a whole burnt offering for the Lord ; and their 
sacrifices, and their libations, shall be a sacrifice, a smell of fra- 

19 grance for the Lord. They shall also prepare one kid of the 
goats for a sin offering, and two lambs of the first year, for a 

20 sacrifice of thanksgiving, with the loaves of the first fruits. 
And the priest shall dedicate these, with the loaves of the first 
fruits, as a dedication before the Lord, with the two lambs. 
They shall be dedicated to the Lord ; they shall be for the priest 

21 who offereth them. And you shall call this day, a set day. It 
shall be hallowed for you. On it you shall do no sacrificial work. 
It is an everlasting statute for your generations in all your dwell- 

22 ings. And when you reap the harvest of your land, you shall 
not make a clean riddance of the harvest of thy field when thou 
reapest, nor shalt thou gather up the gleanings of thy harvest. 
Thou shalt leave them for the poor, and for the stranger. I am 
the Lord your God. 

23 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 



!-!-! XXIII. LEVITICUS. 

24 children of Israel, and say, In the seventh month, on the first 
day of the month, there shall be a rest for yon — a memorial of 

25 trumpets. It shall be a holy set day for you. You shall not do 
any sacrificial service, but offer a whole burnt offering to the 

26 Lord. Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, On the 

27 tenth day of the seventh month is the day of Atonement. It 
shall be a holy set day for you ; and you shall humble your 

28 souls, and offer a whole burnt offering to the Lord. On this 
day you shall not do any kind of work : for it is the day of 
Atonement for you, to make atonement for you before the 

29 Lord your God. Every soul who shall not humble himself on 

30 that day, shall be cut off from among his people. And every 
person who shall do any work on that day, shall be destroyed 

31 from among the people. You shall not do any kind of work. 
It is an everlasting statute for your generations in all your 

32 dwellings. They shall be sabbaths of sabbaths for you, that 
you may humble your souls. From the ninth of the month, 

'from evening till evening, you shall keep these sabbaths of 
yours. 

33 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 

34 children of Israel, and say, On the fifteenth of this seventh 
month shall commence the festival of Tabernacles, seven days 

35 for the Lord. The first day shall be proclaimed holy. You shall 

36 do no sacrificial work ; seven days you shall offer whole burnt 
offerings to the Lord, and the eighth day shall be proclaimed 
holy for you, and you shall offer whole burnt offerings to the 
Lord. It is the exit. You shall not do any sacrificial service. 

37 These are the festivals for the Lord, which you shall pro- 
claim holy, in order that you may offer homage offerings to the 
Lord — whole burnt offerings, with their sacrifices and their li- 
bations — that allotted for each day on its day, over and above 

38 the sabbaths of the Lord, and over and above your gifts, even 
besides all your vows, and besides your free will offerings, 

39 which you may give to the Lord. Now on the fifteenth day of 
this seventh month, when you have finished the ingathering 
of the products of the land, you shall begin this festival of se- 

40 ven days for the Lord. On the first day there shall be a rest ; 
and on the eighth day, a rest. And on the first day you shall 
take the ripe fruit of trees, and branches of palm trees, and 



Oh. XXIV. LEVITICUS. 

bushy boughs of trees and willows, and branches of the willow 
of the brook, to rejoice before the Lord your God seven days 

41 of the year. It shall be an everlasting statute for your genera- 
tions. In the seventh month you shall celebrate this festival. 

42 You shall dwell in booths seven days. All that are Israelites 
born, shall dwell in booths, that your posterity may see that I 

43 caused the children of Israel to dwell in tents when I brought 
them out of the land of Egypt. I am the Lord your God. 

44 And when Moses had mentioned these festivals of the Lord 
XXIV. to the Israelites, the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Give 

2 orders to the children of Israel, and let them bring the oil, 

3 pure expressed oil for light, that a lamp may burn continual- 
ly, without the veil, in the tabernacle of the testimony. And 
Aaron and his sons shall keep it burning, from evening till 
morning, continually, before the Lord. It is an everlasting 

4 statute for your generations. You shall keep the lamps burning 
on the pure candlestick before the Lord, until the morning. 

5 And you shall take fine flour, and make it into twelve loaves, 

6 every loaf shall consist of two tenths ; and you shall lay them 
in two piles, six loaves in each pile, on the pure table before 

7 the Lord. And on each pile you shall lay pure frankincense, 
and salt. They shall be set before the Lord for loaves of re- 

8 membrance. On the day of the sabbaths they shall be set con- 
tinually before the Lord, in the sight of the children of Israel, 
as an everlasting covenant ; and they shall be for Aaron and his 

9 sons. And they shall eat them in a holy place ; for they are 
most holy. This shall be their peculiar due, for ever, from those 
things sacrificed to the Lord. 

10 Xow there had come out among the Israelites a son of an 
Israelitish woman, but his father was an Egyptian. And this 
son of the Israelitish woman, and a man who was an Israelite, 

11 quarrelled in the camp. And the son of the Israelitish woman 
having named the name, cursed it. Upon which they brought 
him before Moses. Now his mother's name was Salomith, she 

12 was a daughter of Dabri, of the tribe of Dan. And when they 
had committed him to custody, to pass sentence on him by the 

13 decree of the Lord, the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Lead 

14 out him who cursed, without the camp, and all who heard 
shall lay their hands on his head, and all the congregation shall 



!-!-! XXV. LEVITICUS. 

15 stone him. Then speak to the children of Israel, and thon shalt 

16 say to them, Be the man who he may who shall curse a god, 
he shall contract guilt ; but let him who nameth the name of 
Lord be put to death. Let the whole congregation of Israel stone 
him with stones ; whether he be a proselyte, or born among 

17 them, when he nameth the name of the Lord, let him die. And 
whosoever smiteth another so that he die, let him be put to 

18 death. And whosoever shall smite a beast, so that it die, let 

19 him make compensation, beast for beast. And whosoever 
shall cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done to 

20 him, so shall it be done to himself ; bruise for bruise ; eye for 
eye ; tooth for tooth ; according to the blemish he hath given 

21 the man, so shall it be returned to him. Whosoever shall smite 

22 a man so that he die, let him be put to death, shall be one and 

23 the same decision for the proselyte, and for the neighbour ; 
for I am the Lord your God. Thereupon Moses spoke to the 
children of Israel, and they brought forth him who had cursed, 
without the camp, and stoned him with stones. 

And when the children of Israel had done as the Lord 

XXV. commanded Moses, The Lord spoke to Moses, saying, 

Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say unto them, 

2 When you are come into the land which I give you, the land 

3 which I give you must rest sabbaths for the Lord. Six years 
thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy 

4 vineyard, and gather the fruit thereof. But in the seventh year 
there shall be sabbaths — there shall be a rest for the land — 
sabbaths for the Lord. Thou shalt neither sow thy field nor 

5 prune thy vineyard, nor reap the spontaneous productions 
of thy field, nor gather the grapes of thy dedication. It shall 

6 be a year of rest for the land. And the sabbaths of the land 
shall be food for thee, and for thy man servant, and for thy 
maid servant, and for thy hired servant, and for the stranger 

7 who sojourneth with thee; and for thy cattle, and the wild 
beasts in thy land, shall the whole product thereof be for food. 

8 Moreover thou shalt reckon for thyself seven rests of years, 
seven times seven years, and these forty nine years, shall be 

9 the seven weeks of years ; and you shall make proclamation 
with the sound of a trumpet, throughout all your land, in the 
seventh month, and tenth day of the month — On the day of 



!-!-! XXV. LEVITICUS. 

the atonement, yon shall make proclamation with a trumpet, 

10 throughout all your land, and dedicate the fiftieth year, and pro- 
claim liberty in the land, to all the inhabitants thereof. And 
this shall be a year of rest, a Jubilee for you ; and every one 
shall return to his possession, and every one shall go to his 

11 family. This jubilee, this fiftieth year, shall be for you a ge- 
neral release, you shall not sow, nor shall you reap the spon- 
taneous productions thereof, nor gather the vintage which is 

12 dedicated. Because it is a jubilee, it shall be holy to you. 

13 From the fields you may eat the productions thereof. In this 
year of release, proclaimed by the sound of trumpets, every 

14 one shall return to his possession. Whether therefore thou 
sellest to thy neighbour, or purchasest of thy neighbour, let 

15 no man take advantage of his neighbour. According to the 
number of years after the jubilee, thou shalt purchase of thy 
neighbour ; and according to the number of years of crops, he 

16 shall sell to thee. In proportion to the greater number of years, 
thou shalt rate his possession higher, and according to the few- 

17 ness of the years, thou shalt rate it lower. For according to 
the number of crops, so shall he sell to thee. Let no man take 
advantage of his neighbour. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy 

18 God. I am the Lord your G-od, therefore you shall practise 
all my rules of rectitude, and all my judgments, and keep 
and do them ; so shall you dwell securely in the land, and the 

19 land shall yield its productions ; and you shall eat plentifully, 

20 and dwell securely therein. Now if you should say, What shall 
we eat in this seventh year, if we neither sow nor gather our 

21 produce? I indeed will send my blessing for you, in the sixth 
year, and it will make the products thereof sufficient for the 

22 three years. Though you are to sow in the eighth year, yet 
on account of the produce, you shall eat the old, even to the 
ninth year, even till the products of that come in, you shall 

23 eat of the old store. Now the land must not be sold forever ; 

24 for the land is mine. Because you are strangers, and sojourn- 
ers before me, therefore in all the land of your possession, 

25 you shall grant a right of redeeming the land. x\nd if thy bro- 
ther who is with thee become poor, and sell any part of his 
possession ; when he who is next of kin to him cometh, he shall 

26 redeem what his brother hath sold. And if any person hath none 

vol. i. d d 



!-!-! XXV. LEVITICUS. 

to redeem, and his own hand hath attained, and found a suffici- 

27 ency, he shall have the right of redemption. And he shall com- 
pute the years of his sale, and pay back what is still due to the 
man to whom he sold it. So shall he return to his possession. 

28 But if his hand cannot attain a sufficiency to repay him, the 
sale shall be good to him who purchased, until the last sixth 
year of the jubilee, and in the jubilee, he shall quit, and the 

29 seller shall return to his possession. And if any person sell a 
dwelling house in a walled city, he shall have the right of re- 

30 deeming it till the term expire. The term for redemption 
shall be a year. And if it be not redeemed till the whole year 
expire, the house which is in a walled city, shall be confirmed 
for ever to the purchaser. And he shall not go out in the ju- 

31 bilee. But the houses which are in villages, unsurrounded 
with walls, shall be accounted as the fields in the country, 
and shall be always subject to redemption, and go out in the 

32 jubilee. And the cities of the Levites, the houses of the cities 
of their possession, shall always be redeemable by the Levites ; 
and whoever among the Levites shall redeem, the intermedi- 
ate purchase of the houses of the city of their possession shall 

33 terminate in the jubilee. For the houses of the cities of the 
Levites are their possession among the children of Israel. 

34 And the fields set apart for their cities shall not be sold; for 

35 this is their perpetual possession. And if thy brother who is 
with thee become poor and distressed in his circumstances 
when near thee, thou shalt help him, as a proselyte or a so- 

36 journer, and thy brother shall live with thee. Thou shalt not 
take from him usury or increase, but thou shalt fear thy God, 

37 I the Lord ; and thy brother shall live with thee. Thou shalt 
not lend him thy money on usury, nor give him thy victuals 

38 for an increase. I am the Lord your God who brought you 
out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Chanaan, and 

39 to be your God. And if thy brother who dwelleth by thee be 
humbled, and sold to thee, he shall not serve thee as a slave. 

40 He shall be with thee as a hireling, or a sojourner. Until the 

41 year of the release he shall work for thee, and in the year of 
the release he shall go out, and his children with him, and 
shall go to his own family — to his paternal possession he shall 

42 haste away. Because they are my servants, whom I brought 



Ck. XXYI. LEVITICUS. 

43 out of the land of Egypt ; he must not be sold as a slave. Thou 
shall not over burthen him with toil, but fear the Lord thy 

44 God. The male and female slaves, whom thou mayst have, 
must be of the nations around thee. Of them you may pur- 

45 chase a male or a female slave ; or of the children of strangers 
who sojourn among you — of them you may purchase and of 

46 their relations who may be born in your land. Let them be 
your property, and divide them among your children after you, 
and they shall be your slaves for life : but of your brethren, the 
children of Israel, one shall not rule over another with ri- 

47 gour. And if a proselyte, or a sojourner who is with thee, 
prosper, and thy brother, being poor, be sold to the proselyte, 
or to the stranger who is with thee, or to the descendant of 

48 the proselyte ; after he is sold he shall have a right to be re- 

49 deemed. One of his brethren may redeem .him, his uncle, or 
his uncle's son, may redeem him, or any of his blood relations, 
of the same tribe, may redeem him ; and if he be able he may 

50 redeem himself. In which case he shall settle with him who 
purchased him, from the year he sold himself, to the year of 
the release, and the price of his purchase shall be as the yearly 
wages of a hired servant for the years he is to be with him. 

51 And if any one hath many years to serve, for them he shall pay 
the rates of redemption, on account of the money paid for him ; 

~sl and if but few years remain to the year of release, he shall set- 
tle with him according to those years, and pay the rates of his 

53 redemption. As a servant hired from year to year, he shall be 
with him ; and thou shalt not suffer him to be oppressed with 

54 labour in thy sight. If he be not redeemed in any of these ways, 
in the year of the release he shall go out, and his children with 
him ; for the children of Israel are my domestics — they are 
my servants whom I brought out of Egypt. 

XXVI. I am the Lord your God ; you shall not make for your- 
selves carved or graven images, nor set up a pillar for your- 

2 selves, nor place a watch stone in your land to worship it. I am 
the Lord your God, you shall keep my sabbaths, and rever- 

3 ence my holy things. I am the Lord ; if you walk in my sta- 

4 tutes, and keep my commandments, and do them, I will give 
you rain in its season : and the land shall yield its productions ; 

5 and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit ; and the thresher 



!-!-! XXYI. LEVITICUS. 

shall overtake the vintager ; and the vintager shall overtake the 
sower ; and you shall eat your bread in plenty ; and dwell in 
your land securely, and war shall not pass through your land. 

6 I will indeed give you peace in your land ; and you shall lie 

7 down to rest ; and there shall be none to make you afraid. I will 
destroy the wild beasts out of your land ; and you shall pursue 
your enemies, and they shall fall before you with destruction. 

8 Even five of you shall pursue an hundred ; and a hundred of 
you shall pursue myriads, and your enemies shall fall before 

9 you by the sword. And I will watch over you, and increase 
you, and multiply you, and establish my covenant with you. 

10 And you shall eat the last year's crops, and the crops of the year 

11 before, and remove old stores out of the way of new. And I 
will fix my tabernacle among you, and my soul will not abhor 

12 you. And I will walk about among you, and be your God, 
and you shall be my people. 

13 I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land 
of Egypt. When you were slaves, I broke the bond of your 

14 yoke, and led you out in confidence : Now if you will not heark- 

15 en to me, nor perform these my commandments, but disobey 
them, and your souls abhor my judgments, so as not to per- 
form all my commandments, so as to break my covenant, I will 

10 deal with you in this manner — I will send against you distress, 
and the scab, and the gangrene to eat out your eyes ; and wast- 
ing consumption ; and you shall sow your seed in vain ; for your 

1 7 enemies shall eat it : and I will set my face against you ; and 
you shall fall before your enemies ; and they who hate you shall 
pursue you; and you shall flee when there is none pursuing 

18 you. And if for all this you will not hearken to me, I will pro- 
ceed to chastise you seven fold for your offences, and break 

19 the haughtiness of your pride. — I will make the heaven for 
you as iron, and your land as brass ; and your strength shall be 

20 spent in vain. The earth shall not yield you its seed, nor shall 

21 the trees of the field yield you their fruit. And after all these 
things, if you walk adversely and will not hearken to me, I will 

22 bring seven fold plagues upon you according to your sins — I 
will send against you the wild beasts of the earth, and they shall 
devour you, and destroy your cattle ; and I will make you few 

23 in number, and your high ways shall be desolate. And if by 



Oh. XXVI. LEVITICUS. 

these thmo-s you be not reformed, but walk adversely before 

2-1 me, I also will walk with you in adverse wrath, and smite you 

25 seven fold for your sins— I will bring a sword against you to 

avenge the cause of the covenant ; and when you flee to your 

cities, I will send pestilence among you, and you shall be de- 

20 livered into the hands of your enemies. In your affliction for 

want of bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven 

and dole out your bread by weight, and you shall eat, but shall 

27 not be satisfied. And if for these things you will not hearken 

28 to me, but walk adversely before me, I also will walk with you 
in adverse ire, and chastise you seven fold, according to your 

29 sins. And you shall eat the flesh of your sons ; and the flesh of 

30 your daughters also you shall eat : and I will lay waste your 
pillars, and utterly destroy your carved images of wood, and 
cast your mangled limbs among the mangled limbs of your 

31 idols, and my soul will abhor you. And I will lay waste your 
cities, and make your sanctuaries a desolation, and no longer be 

o2 reo-aled with the smell of your sacrifices. I will also make your 
land a desolation, and your enemies who dwell therein shall be 

33 astonished at it. And I will scatter you among the nations, and 

34 a sword shall overtake and consume you. And your land shall 
be a waste, and your cities a desolation. And the land shall 
then enjoy its sabbaths all the time of its desolation. When 
you shall be in the land of your enemies, the land shall then 

35 rest ; and the land shall keep those sabbaths, which it did not 
3b' keep by your sabbaths when you dwelt therein. And upon 

those of you who are left, I will bring a slavery, which shall 
reach their very hearts, in the land of their enemies. The sound 
of a leaf driven by the wind will scare them ; and they shall flee 
like those who flee from a battle, and shall fall when none pur- 

37 sueth. And brother shall overlook brother as in a battle, though 
none attacketh ; and you shall not be able to withstand your 

38 enemies. And you shall perish among the nations, and the land 

39 of your enemies shall devour you. And those of you who are 
left shall pine away for their sins, and for the sins of their fa- 

40 thers— In the land of their enemies they shall pine away, and 
confess their sins and the sins of their fathers, that they have 

41 transgressed, and neglected me, and that they have walked per- 
versely before me, and I have walked with them in vengeful 



Cli. XXVII. LEVITICUS. 

ire. When I am destroying them in the land of their enemies, 
then will their imcircumcised heart be ashamed, and then will 

42 they bear their sins with humble submission ; whereupon I 
will call to remembrance the covenant with Jacob, and the co- 
venant with Isaak, and I will call to remembrance the cove- 

43 nant with Abraham, and remember the land. When the land 
shall be forsaken by them, and when the land shall have enjoy- 
ed its sabbaths by being made a waste on their account, and 
they have borne their iniquities because they neglected my 

44 judgments, and in their hearts abhorred my statutes, (as I did 
not, when they were in their enemies' country, wholly over- 
look them, nor abhor them so as to destroy them utterly, for 

45 breaking my covenant which I made with them, for I am the 
Lord their C4od) then will I remember the covenant with them 
— that old covenant when I brought them out of the land of 

46 Egypt — out of the house of bondage, to be their G-od. I am 
the Lord ; These are my judgments, and these are my statutes, 
and this is the law which the Lord hath given between him- 
self and the children of Israel, at mount Sina, by the ministra- 
tion of Moses. 

XXVII. Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to 

2 the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, Whoever 
shalt vow a vow as the price of his life to the Lord, the price 

3 shall be — of a male from twenty to sixty years of age, the 

4 price shall be fifty didrachms of silver, sanctuary weight ; and 

5 of a female, the valuation shall be thirty didrachms. And if it 
be of one from five to twenty years of age, the price of a male 

6 shall be twenty didrachms, and of a female ten didrachms. And 
if it be of one from a month to five years old, the price of a male 
shall be five didrachms, and of a female three didrachms of silver. 

7 And if it be of one from sixty years old and upwards ; if a male 
the price shall be fifteen didrachms of silver, and if a female, ten 

8 didrachms. And if any be too poor for this valuation, he shall 
present himself before the priest and the priest shall set a value 
on him — according to the ability of him who made the vow, the 

9 priest shall value him. But if the gift to the Lord be from the 
cattle which may be offered, whoever shall give any of these to 

10 the Lord, it shall be sacred. He shall not change it, a good for a 
bad ; nor a bad for a good : and if he actually change this beast 



!-!-! XXVIF. LEVITICUS. 

for another, both it and that given in exchange shall be sacred. 

11 But if it be any kind of unclean beast of which a gift cannot be 
made to the Lord, he shall present the beast before the priest ; 

12 and the priest shall value it at a medium between a good and 
a bad one ; and according as the priest shall value it, so it shall 

13 stand ; and if the person chuse to redeem it, he shall add a 

14 fifth to the valuation. And if a man make a dedication of his 
house to the Lord, the priest shall value it at a medium be- 
tween a good and a bad house. And according as the priest 

15 shall value it so it shall stand; and if he who dedicated it 
chuse to redeem it, he shall add thereto a fifth of the money at 

10 which it was rated, and it shall be his. And if it be apart of the 
land of his possession, which a man shall dedicate to the Lord, 
the valuation shall be according to the seed thereof, fifty di- 

17 drachms of silver for a core of barley — If he dedicate it at the 

18 jubilee ; at this valuation it shall stand. But if he dedicate his 
field after the jubilee ; the priest shall compute for him the 
money on the years which remain to the jubilee, and make a 

19 deduction from the full valuation of it. And if the man who 
made the dedication chuse to redeem the field, he shall add 
one fifth of the money to the valuation of it, and it shall be his. 

20 But if he decline to redeem the field, and selleth the field to 

21 another man, he shall never afterwards redeem it ; but at the 
going out of the jubilee the field shall be consecrated to the 
Lord, and he shall have possession of it as land set apart 

22 for the priest. And if a man make a dedication to the Lord of 
a field which he hath purchased, and which is not a part of 

23 his inheritance, though the priest settle with him the amount 
of the price from the year of the jubilee, and he pay the price 
at which it was rated on the day he made the dedication to the 

24 Lord ; yet in the year of the jubilee the field shall be restored 
to the man of whom he purchased it, and whose field of posses- 

25 sion it was. Now every valuation shall be by holy weight, twenty 

26 oboli making a didrachm. And with regard to every firstling 
if it be among the cattle, it shall be for the Lord, and none 
shall dedicate it. Whether it be of the herds or flocks it is the 

27 Lord's. And if it be of the four footed beasts which are un- 
clean, he must redeem it according to the valuation, and add 
thereto a fifth, and it shall be his. And if he will not redeem 
it, it shall be sold for its value. 



Ck XXVII. LEVITICUS. 

28 But with respect to every Anathema which a man inay de- 
vote to the Lord from all that he hath, whether from man or 
beast, or from field of his [possession, it shall not be sold nor 
redeemed. Every anathema shall be most sacredly devoted to 

29 the Lord. And every thing which hath been devoted as an 
anathema from among men, shall not be redeemable, but by 

30 death. The whole tenth of the land, both of the produce of the 
land, and of the fruit of the trees, is for the Lord. It is dedi- 

31 cated to the Lord. And if any man chuse to redeem his tenth 
by purchase, he shall add to the valuation a fifth, and it shall be 

32 his. Now the whole tenth of herds and flocks— even every 
one which in numbering shall come under the rod, that tenth 

33 shall be dedicated to the Lord. Thou shalt not change a good 
for a bad, nor a bad for a good ; and if thou shalt actually make 
an exchange, that given in exchange shall also be consecrated, 
and shall not be redeemed. 

34 These are the commands which the Lord gave in charge 
to Moses for the children of Israel at mount Sina. 

NUMBEKS. 

I. Again the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sina, 
in the tabernacle of the testimony, on the first day of the se- 
cond month, in the second year of their coming out of the land 

2 of Egypt, and said, Take ye the sum of the whole congrega- 
tion of Israel, according to pedigrees, and according to the 
houses of their patriarchal families, and according to the num- 

3 ber of their names, according to their poll, every male from 
twenty years old and upwards, every one who goeth out in the 

4 army of Israel ; review them with their army. Thou and 
Aaron shall review them, and with you there shall be of 

5 the chiefs, one from each tribe. They shall be the chiefs of 
the patriarchal houses ; and these are the names of the men 

6 who shall attend you. Of the Beubenites, Elisur, son of Se- 

7 dur ; of the Symeonites, Salamiel, son of Surisadai ; of the 

8 children of Judas, Naasson, son of Aniinadab ; of the children 
of Issachar, Nathaniel, son of Sogar ; of the Zabulonites, Eliab, 

9 son of Chailon ; of the children of Joseph — of the Ephraimites, 
10 Elisama, son of Emiud ; of the Manassites, Gamaliel, son of 



!-!-! I. NUMBERS. 

11 Phadassur; of the Benjaminites, Abidon, son of Gadeoni ; of 

12 the Danites, Achiezer, son of Amisadai ; of the Aserites, Pha- 

13 giel, son of Echran ; of the Gadites, Elisaph, son of Piaguel ; of 

14 the Nephthaleimites, Achire, son of Ainan. These are renown- 
ed men of the congregation, chiefs of the tribes according to 

17 their patriarchal families, the chiliarchs of Israel. So Moses 

18 and Aaron took these men, who were expressly named, and 
assembled all the congregation on the first day of the second 
month, and marshalled them according to their pedigrees, ac- 
cording to their families, according to the number of their 

19 names, from twenty years old and upwards, every male by their 
poll, as the Lord commanded Moses, and reviewed them in 

20 the wilderness of Sina. And there were of the children of Reu- 
ben, Jacob's first born, according to their pedigrees, according 
to their communities, according to the houses of their families, 
according to the number of names by their poll — all the males 
from twenty years old and upwards, every one who went out 

21 in the army, on the review of those of the tribe of Reuben, 
were forty six thousand five hundred. 

22 And of the Symeonites, according to their pedigrees, ac- 
cording to their communities, according to the houses of their 
families, according to the number of their names, according to 
their poll, all the males from twenty years old and upwards, 

23 every one who went out in the army, on the review of them, 
of the tribe of Symeon, were fifty nine thousand three hundred. 

26 And of the children of Judas, according to their pedigrees, 
according to their communities, according to the houses of 
their families, according to the number of their names by their 
poll ; all the males from twenty years old and upwards, every 

27 one who went out in the army, on the review of those of the 
tribe of Judas, were seventy four thousand six hundred. 

28 And of the Issacharites, according to their pedigrees, accord- 
ing to their communities, according to the houses of their fami- 
lies, according to the number of their names by their poll, all 

29 the males from twenty years old and upwards, every one who 
went out in the army, on a review of those of the tribe of Issa- 
char, were fifty four thousand four hundred. 

30 And of the Zabulonites, according to their pedigrees, ac- 
cording to their communities, according to the houses of their 

vol. i. e e 



CJi. I. NUMBERS. 

families, according to the number of their names by their poll, 
81 all the males from twenty years old and upwards, every one 
who went out in the army, on a review of those of the tribe of 
Zabulon, were fifty seven thousand four hundred. 

32 And of the children of Joseph — Of the Ephraimites, accord- 
ing to their pedigrees, according to their communities, accord- 
ing to the houses of their families, according to the number of 
their names by their poll, all the males from twenty years old 

33 and upwards, every one who went out in the army, on a re- 
view of those of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand five 

34 hundred. And of the Manassites, according to their pedigrees, 
according to their communities, according to the houses of 

35 their families, according to the number of their names by their 
poll, all the males from twenty years old and upwards, every 
one who went out in the army, on a review of those of the tribe 
of Manasses, were thirty two thousand two hundred. 

36 And of the Benjaminites, according to their pedigrees, ac- 
cording to their communities, according to the houses of their 
families, according to the number of their names by their poll, 
all the males from twenty years old and upwards, every one 

37 who went out in the army, on a review of those of the tribe of 
Benjamin, were thirty five thousand four hundred. 

24 And of the Gadites, according to their pedigrees, accord- 
ing to their communities, according to the houses of their fa- 
milies, according to the number of their names by their poll, 

25 all the males from twenty years old and upwards, every one 
who went out in the army, on a review of those of the tribe of 
Gad, were forty five thousand six hundred and fifty. 

38 And of the Danites, according to their pedigrees, accord- 
ing to their communities, according to the houses of their fa- 
milies, according to the number of their names by their poll, 

39 all the males from twenty years old and upwards, every one 
who went out in the army, on a review of those of the tribe of 
Dan, were sixty two thousand seven hundred. 

40 And of the Aserites, according to their pedigrees, accord- 
ing to their communities, according to the houses of their fa- 
milies, according to the number of their names by their poll, 

41 all the males from twenty years old and upwards, every one 
who went out in the army, on a review of those of the tribe of 
Aser, were fortv one thousand five hundred. 



!-!-! II NUMBERS. 

42 And of the Nephthaleiniites, according to their pedigrees, 
according to their communities, according to the houses of their 
families, according to the number of their names by their poll, 

4o all the males from twenty years old and upwards, every one 
who went out in the army, on a review of those of the tribe of 
Nephthaleini, were fifty three thousand four hundred. 

44 This was the review which Moses and Aaron, and the 
chiefs of Israel made. The chiefs were twelve, a man for 
every tribe. They were of the patriarchal houses of their re- 

45 spective tribes. And the whole review of the Israelites, compre- 

46 hending their army from twenty years old and upwards, every 
one who went out to be marshalled in Israel, was six hundred 

47 and three thousand five hundred and fifty. But the Levites of 

48 the tribe of their father's house, were not reviewed among the 

49 Israelites : for the Lord had spoken to Moses, saying, See that 
thou review not the tribe of Levi, nor take an account of them 

50 among the children of Israel. But thou shalt set the Levites 
over the tabernacle of the testimony, and over all the utensils 
thereof, and over all the things which are in it. They shall car- 
ry the tabernacle, and all its utensils, and they shall minister 

51 therein, and encamp about the tabernacle. And when the ta- 
bernacle is to remove, the Levites shall take it down; and 
when the tabernacle is to be pitched, they shall set it up. 
And if any of another family come near, let him be put to 

52 death. And when the Israelites encamp, every man in his sta- 
tion, and every man according to his command, with their ar- 

53 my, let the Levites encamp before them, around the taberna- 
cle of the testimony, that there may be no lapse committed by 
the children of Israel ; and that the Levites themselves may 
guard the tabernacle of the testimony. 

54 And when the Israelites had done according to all that the 
II. Lord commanded Moses, then the Lord spoke to Moses and 

2 Aaron, saying, Let the children of Israel encamp close to one 
another, by divisions, by standards, by the houses of their fa- 

3 milies, facing the tabernacle of the testimony. All around it 
the Israelites shall encamp. And they who encamp first, to- 
wards the east, shall be the division of the camp of Judas with 

4 their army ; and the chief of the children of Judas shall be 
Naasson, son of Aminadab; his army — even they who were re- 



!-!-! II. NUMBEKS. 

5 viewed, being seventy four thousand six hundred ; and they 
who encamp adjoining, shall be the division of the tribe of Is- 
sachar, and the chief of the Issacharites shall be Nathaniel, son 

(3 of Sogar ; his army — even they who were reviewed, being fifty 

7 four thousand four hundred ; and they who encamp adjoining, 

8 shall be the division of the tribe of Zabulon, and the chief of 
the Zabulonites shall be Eliab, son of Chailon ; his army — even 
they who were reviewed, being fifty seven thousand four hun- 

9 dred — all those of the camp of Judas who have been reviewed, 
amounting to one hundred and eighty six thousand four hun- 
dred, with their army, shall march in the van. 

10 And their army on the south, shall be the divisions of the 
camp of Keuben, and the chief of the Keubenites shall be Eli- 

1 1 sar, son of Sedur ; his army, even they who have been review- 

12 ed, being forty six thousand five hundred ; and they who 
encamp adjoining him, shall be the division of the tribe of 
Symeon, and the chief of the Symeonites shall be Salamiel, 

13 son of Surisadai ; his army, even they who were reviewed, be- 

14 ing fifty nine thousand three hundred ; and they who encamp 

15 adjoining shall be the tribe of Gad ; and the chief of the Odd- 
ites, shall be Elisaph, son of Kaguel ; his army, even they who 
were reviewed, being forty five thousand six hundred and 

16 fifty. All those of the camp of Reuben who have been review- 
ed, amounting to one hundred and fifty one thousand four 
hundred and fifty, with their army, shall march as the second 
division. 

17 Then shall move the tabernacle of the testimony, and the 
camp of the Levites, as the centre division of the camps. As 
they encamp so they shall take up their march, every man in 
his rank, according to their companies. 

IS And on the west shall be the division of the camp of 
Ephraim, with their army ; and the chief of the Ephraimites 

19 shall be Elisama, son of Emiud ; his army, even they who 

20 were reviewed, being forty thousand five hundred ; and they 
who encamp adjoining, shall be the division of the tribe of 
Manasses, and the chief of the Manassites shall be Gamaliel, 

21 son of Phadassur ; his army, even they who were reviewed, be- 

22 ing thirty two thousand two hundred ; and they who encamp ad- 
joining, shall be the division of the tribe of Benjamin ; and the 



!-!-! III. NUMBERS. 

23 chief of the Benjaminites shall be Abidon, son of Gradeoni ; his 
army, even they who were reviewed, being thirty five thou- 

24 sand four hundred. All those of the camp of Ephraim who 
have been reviewed, amounting to one hundred and eight 
thousand one hundred, with their army, shall march as the 
third division. 

25 And on the north shall be the division of the camp of Dan ; 

26 with their army; and the chief of the Danites shall be 
Achiezer, son of Amisadai ; his army, even they who were re- 

27 viewed, being sixty two thousand seven hundred ; and they 
who encamp adjoining him, shall be the tribe of Aser ; and the 

28 chief of the Aserites, shall be Phagiel, son of Echran ; his ar- 
my, even they who have been reviewed, being forty one thou- 

29 sand five hundred : and they who encamp adjoining, shall be the 
division of the tribe of Nephthaleim, and the chief of the Neph- 

30 thaleimites shall be Achire, son of Ainan ; his army, even they 
who were reviewed, being fifty three thousand four hundred. 

31 All those of the camp of Dan, who have been reviewed, amount- 
ing to one hundred and fifty seven thousand six hundred, shall 
march as the rear division. 

32 This is the review of the children of Israel according to the 
houses of their families ; the whole muster of the camps, com- 

33 prehending their armies, being six hundred and three thou- 
sand R\e hundred and fifty. But the Levites were not review- 

34 ed among them, as the Lord commanded Moses. And the 
children of Israel did all that the Lord commanded Moses. So 
they encamped according to their divisions, and so they set 
out on their march, every one in his rank, according to their 
communities, and according to the houses of their families. 

III. Now this is the genealogy of Aaron and Moses. 

2 On the day when the Lord spoke to Moses at mount Si- 
na, these were the names of xVaron's sons, Nadab his first 

3 born, and Abiud, Eleazar and Ithamar. These were the names 
of Aaron's sons who were anointed priests, whose hands were 

4 consecrated to minister in the priest's office. But Nadab and 
Abiud died in the presence of the Lord, upon their offering 
strange fire before the Lord, in the wilderness of Sina, and they 
had no children ; so Eleazar and Ithamar officiated as priests 

5 with their father. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Take 



!-!-! III. NUMBERS. 

6 the tribe of Levi, and thou shalt present them before Aaron 

7 the priest, and they shall minister to him, and keep his watch- 
es, and the watches of the children of Israel before the taber- 

8 nacle of the testimony, to do the works of the tabernacle. Now 
that they may keep all the utensils of the tabernacle of the tes- 
timony, and the watches of the children of Israel, as far as they 

9 respect all the works of the tabernacle ; and that thou mayst 
give the Levites, to Aaron and his sons the priests ; they are 
to be given to me as a gift from among the children of Israel. 

10 And thou shalt set Aaron and his sons over the tabernacle of 
the testimony, and they shall keep watch over their priesthood, 
and all that appertain to the altar, and that are within the veil ; 
and if any one of another family touch these, he shall be put 
to death. 

11 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Behold I have 

12 taken the Levites from among the children of Israel, instead of 
all the first born males among the children of Israel. The Le- 
vites shall be the price of their redemption, and shall be mine ; 

13 for every first born belongeth to me. On the day when I smote 
every first born in the land of Egypt, I hallowed for myself 
all the firstlings in Israel. The firstlings both of man and beast 
shall belong to me. I am the Lord. 

14 Then the Lord spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sina, 

15 saying, Review the children of Levi, according to the houses 
of their families, according to their communities. Review 

16 them every male, from a month old and upwards. Accordingly 
Moses and Aaron reviewed them, at the command of the Lord, 

17 in the manner the Lord commanded them. Now these were 
the sons of Levi by their names, Gerson, Kaath, and Merari. 

18 And these are the sons of Gerson, according to their comniu- 

19 nities ; Lobeni and Semei. And these are the sons of Kaath 
according to their communities, Amram and Issaar, Chebron 

20 and Oziel. And the sons of Merari, according to their com- 
munities, were Mooli and Mousi. These are the communities 
of the Levites, according to the houses of their families. 

21 To the Gersonites belong the community of the Lobenites, 

22 and the community of the Semeites. These are the commu- 
nities of the Gersonites ; and the review of them according to 
the number of every male, from a month old and upwards — 



!-!-! III. NUMBERS. 

on a review of tliern the number was seven thousand two 

23 hundred. Now the G-ersonites are to encamp behind the taber- 

24 nacle, towards the west, and the chief of the head of the fami- 
ly of the community of the Gersonites, was Elisaph son of 

25 Dael. And the charge of the Gersonites in the tabernacle of 
the testimony, was the tabernacle and the covering ; and the 

26 curtain of the door of the tabernacle of the testimony ; and 
the hangings of the court ; and the curtain of the gate, of the 
court around the tabernacle ; and the rest of the works thereof. 

27 To the Kaathites belonged the community of the Amra- 
mites, and the community of the Issaarites, and the commu- 
nity of the Chebronites, and the community of the Ozielites. 

28 These are the communities of the Kaathites according to 
the numeration ; every male, from a month old and upwards, 

29 amounted to eight thousand six hundred. These communities 
of the Kaathites, having the charge of the holy things, are to 

30 encamp on the south side of the tabernacle ; and the chief of 
the head family of the communities of the Kaathites was Eli- 

31 saphan, son of Oziel ; and their charge was the ark, and the 
table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the utensils of 
the sanctuary which were used in the priest's office ; and the 

32 veil, and all the works thereof. And the chief over the chiefs 
of the Levites, was Eleazar, the son of Aaron, set over them 
to superintend the watches of the holy things. 

33 To the Merarites belonged the community of Mooli, and 

34 the community of Mousi. These are the communities of the 
Merarites. The muster of them, comprehending every male 
from one month old and upwards, was six thousand two hun- 

35 dred. And the chief of the head family of the community of 
the Merarites, was Suriel, the son of Abichail. They are to 

36 encamp on the north side of the tabernacle ; and the review of 
the watch of the Merarites, had the charge of the tabernacle, 
and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the bases there- 

37 of, with all their appurtenances and works, and the pillars of the 
court round about, with their stakes and their cords . 

38 They who encamp in front of the tabernacle of the testi- 
mony, towards the east, were Moses and xVaron, and their sons, 
who have the superintendance of the watches of the sanctuary, 
for the purpose of guarding the things committed to the charge 



!-!-! IV. NUMBERS. 

of the Israelites, and if any of another family touch them, he is 
to be put to death. 

39 The whole muster of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron 
reviewed, by the command of the Lord, according to their 
communities — all the males, from a month old and upwards, 
were twenty two thousand. 

40 Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Review all the 
male first born of the children of Israel, from one month old 

41 and upwards, and take the number by name. And thou shalt 
take the Levites for me — I the Lord ; instead of all the first 
born sons of Israel ; and the cattle of the Levites instead of 
all the firstlings of the cattle belonging to the children of 

42 Israel. So Moses reviewed, in the manner the Lord com- 

43 manded, all the male first born among the Israelites ; and all 
the first born males, numbered by name, from one month old 
and upwards, were twenty two thousand two hundred and se- 

44 venty three. Whereupon the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, 

45 Take the Levites, instead of all the first born of the children 
of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites, for the firstlings of their 

46 cattle ; and the Levites shall belong to me — I the Lord. And 
as redemption money for the two hundred and seventy three, 

47 of the first born, more than the Levites, thou shalt take from 
the first born of the children of Israel, five shekels a poll. Ac- 
cording to the holy didrachm, thou shall receive twenty oboli 

48 for a shekel. And thou shalt give the money to Aaron and 
his sons, as the redemption of the overplus among the Israel- 

49 ites. So Moses took the redemption money, for those who ex- 

50 ceeded the redemption made by the Levites. From the first 
born of the children of Israel he took the money, amounting 

51 to one thousand three hundred and sixty five shekels accord- 
ing to the holy shekel, and gave the redemption money for 
the overplus to Aaron and his sons, by the command of the 
Lord, as the Lord commanded Moses. 

IV. Then the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying ; Take 

2 the sum of the Kaathites, apart from the Levites, according to 
their communities, according to the houses of their families, 

3 from twenty fi\e years and upwards, to fifty years, every one 
who goeth in to minister ; to do all the services of the taberna- 

4 cle of the testimony. Now these are the services of the Kaa- 



!-!-! IV. NUMBERS. 

thites in the tabernacle of the testimony, a most sacred ser- 



.) 



vice. When the camp is about to remove, Aaron shall go in 
with his sons, and they shall take down the covering veil, and 
with it cover the ark of the testimony, and put thereon the co- 

6 vering of blue skins ; and over it they shall spread a mantle, 

7 wholly blue, and put in the staves. Then over the presence 
table they shall spread a mantle, all of purple ; upon it, and upon 
the platters, and the censers, and the goblets, and the libation 
cups, with which he maketh libations; and the loaves which 

8 are continually thereon shall be upon it. And they shall throw 
over it a scarlet mantle, and cover it, with a blue skin cover - 

9 ing, and put in the staves to carry it. Then they shall take a 
blue mantle, and cover the candlestick which giveth light with 
its lamps, and its snuffers, and its tweezers, and all the oil ves- 

10 sels, which they use in that service ; and they shall put it, and 
all the utensils thereof, into a blue skin covering, and lay it on 

11 the staves to carry it. They shall then cover the golden altar 
with a blue mantle, and spread over it a skin covering of blue, 

12 and put in the staves thereof to carry it. And they shall take 
all the utensils used in the service, all with which they minister 
in the holies, and put them into a blue mantle, and cover them 
with a skin covering of blue, and lay them on staves to carry 

13 them. Then they shall put the cover on the altar, and cover it 

14 with a mantle, entirely of purple, and they shall lay thereon all 
the utensils with which they minister at it, namely the censers, 
and the flesh forks, and the cups, and the cover, and the vials, 
and all the utensils of the altar ; and they shall throw over it a 
skin covering of blue, and put in the staves to carry it. Then 
they shall take a purple mantle, and cover the laver and its base ; 
and put it in a skin covering of blue, and put it on the staves. 

15 And when Aaron and his sons have finished covering the holy 
things, and all the utensils, while the camp is removing, after 
this the sons of Kaath shall come in to carry them ; but they 
shall not touch the holy things lest they die. These things the 
sons of Kaath shall take up in the tabernacle of the testimony. 

16 The overseer, Eleazar son of Aaron the priest, shall have the 
charge of the oil for light, and of the compound incense, and the 
daily sacrifice, and the anointing oil, and the oversight of the 
whole tabernacle, and all that are in it, in the sanctuary, in all 

VOL. I. F f 



!-!-! IV. NUMBERS. 

17 the works thereof. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, 

18 saying, That you may not destroy this community of the tribe, 

19 namely the Kaathites, from among the Levites, you must do 
this for them, that they may live and not die ; When they go 
into the holy of holies, let Aaron and his sons go in before them ; 
and they shall station them, every one according to what he is 

20 to carry : And let them not go in abruptly, to view the holy 
things, so they shall not die. 

21 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Take the sum 

22 of the Gersonites — of them also according to the houses of their 

23 families, according to their communities. Review them, from 
twenty five years, and upwards, to fifty years of age, every one 
who goeth in to minister — to do his work in the tabernacle of 

24 the testimony. The service of the community of the Gerson- 

25 ites is the same, namely to serve and to carry. They shall car- 
ry the skin coverings of the tabernacle of the testimony with 
its covering, the upper covering of blue which is upon it, and 
the curtain of the door of the tabernacle of the testimony, and 

26 the hangings of the court, both all that are for the tabernacle 
of the testimony, and those about it, and all the sacred imple- 

27 ments which are used in the holy service. They shall act un- 
der the direction of Aaron and his sons, whatever may be the 
service of the Gersonites, in all their services, and in all their 
works. So thou shalt review them by name, having respect to 

28 all the burdens to be carried by them. This is the service of the 
Gersonites in the tabernacle of the testimony, and the super- 
intendance of them shall be by the hand of Ithamar, the son of 
Aaron the priest. 

29 With regard to the Merarites, review them according to 

30 their communities, according to the houses of their families — 
review them from twenty five years, and upwards, to fifty years 
of age ; every one who goeth in to do the works of the taber- 

31 nacle of the testimony, to take charge of those things to be 
carried by them, according to all their works for the taber- 
nacle of the testimony, namely the capitals of the taberna- 
cle, and the bars, and the pillars thereof, the bases thereof, 
and the bases and pillars for the veil, and for the curtain 

32 of the door of the tabernacle, and the pillars of the court 
round about, with their bases, and the pillars for the curtain of 



!-!-! IV. NUMBERS. 

the gate of the court, with their bases, and their pins, and their 
cords, and all the implements thereof, and all their services — 
review them by name, and all the implements which are to be 

33 under their charge, and to be carried by them. This service 
of the community of the Merarites, in all their works, for the 
tabernacle of the testimony, shall be under the superintendance 
of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest. 

34 Accordingly Moses and Aaron, and the chiefs of Israel, 
reviewed the Kaathites according to their communities, ac- 

35 cording to the houses of their families, from twenty five years 
old, and upwards, to fifty years of age, every one who went in 
to minister, and do service for the tabernacle of the testimony ; 

36 and the number of them, according to their communities, was 

37 two thousand seven hundred and fifty. This was the muster 
of the community of the Kaathites, comprehending every one 
who performed service for the tabernacle of the testimony, as 

38 Moses and Aaron reviewed them, at the command of the Lord, 
by the hand of Moses. 

Then the Gersonites were reviewed according to their com- 
munities, according to the houses of their families, from twenty 

39 five years, and upwards, to fifty years of age, comprehending 
every one who went in to serve, and perform works for the 

40 tabernacle of the testimony. And the muster of them, accord- 
ing to their communities, according to the houses of their fa- 

41 milies, was two thousand six hundred and thirty. This was 
the review of the community of the Gersonites, comprehend- 
ing every one who performed service for the tabernacle of the 
testimony, whom Moses and Aaron reviewed, at the command 
of the Lord, by the hand of Moses. 

42 Then was reviewed the community of the Merarites, ac- 
cording to their communities, according to the houses of their 

43 families, from twenty five years, and upwards, to fifty years of 
age, comprehending every one who went in to perform the holy 

44 works of the tabernacle of the testimony ; And the muster of 
them according to their communities, according to the houses 

45 of their families, was three thousand two hundred. This was 
the muster of the community of the Merarites, whom Moses 
and Aaron reviewed, at the command of the Lord, by the hand 
of Moses. 



!-!-! Y. NUMBERS. 

46 All the Levites who were reviewed, whom Moses with 

47 Aaron and the chiefs of Israel reviewed by communities, by 
the houses of their families, from twenty five years, and up- 
wards, to fifty years of age, comprehending every one who 
went in for the performance of works and for the business of 

48 carrying for the tabernacle of the testimony ; even all who were 
reviewed, were eight thousand five hundred and eighty. At 
the command of the Lord, by the hand of Moses, he reviewed 
them, man by man, for their works, and for the things which 
they were to carry. They were reviewed in the manner the 
Lord commanded Moses. 

V. Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Give orders to the 

2 children of Israel, and let them send out of the camp every 
one who is a leper, and every one who hath a gonorrhea, and 

3 every one who is defiled by the dead ; whether male or female, 
send them out of the camp, that they may not defile their camps 

4 in which I am present among them. Whereupon the children 
of Israel did so. They sent them away out of the camp, as the 

5 Lord commanded Moses. And when they had done so, the 

6 Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the childreu of Israel, 
and say, When a man or a woman shall commit any sin inci- 
dent to man ; or by inadvertency overlook or commit a tres- 

7 pass, that person shall confess the sin which he or she hath 
committed, and make compensation for the trespass. Adding 
one fifth to the principal, he shall give it to the person against 

8 whom the trespass hath been committed. And if the man hath 
no kinsman to whom compensation can be made, the com- 
pensation, being given to the Lord, shall belong to the priest, 
over and above the ram of atonement, with which he shall make 

9 atonement for him. And every dedication — whatever the chil- 
dren of Israel shall dedicate, and bring for the Lord, shall be 
for the priest — even every one's hallowed things shall be his ; 

10 let who will give, they shall belong to the priest. 

11 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 

12 children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, If any man's 

13 wife transgress, and actually despise him ; and any person lie 
with her carnally, and it escape the notice of her husband, and 
it be hid, and she be polluted, though there be no witness 

14 against her, and she be not caught in the act; and a spirit of 



!-!-! V. NUMBERS. 

jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and 
she be polluted ; or a spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he 

15 be jealous of his wife, though she be not polluted, the man 
shall bring his wife to the priest, and shall bring as a gift for 
her the tenth of an ephah of barley meal ; but he shall pour no 
oil on it, nor lay any frankincense on it ; for it is a sacrifice of 
jealousy — a sacrifice of remembrance, to bring into remem- 

16 brance a sin. And the priest shall bring her forward, and set 

17 her before the Lord. Then the priest shall take pure spring- 
water, in an earthen vessel, and having taken up some of the 
dust which is on the floor of the tabernacle of the testimony, 

18 the priest shall put it in the water. And the priest shall pre- 
sent the woman before the Lord, and uncover the woman's 
head. Then he shall put the sacrifice of remembrance — the 
sacrifice of jealousy into her hands ; and in the hand of the 
priest shall be the water of discovery over which an impreca- 

19 tion is to be made ; and the priest shall adjure the woman, and 
say to her, If no man hath lain with thee ; if thou hast not trans- 
gressed, so as to be defiled, while under the jurisdiction of thy 
husband ; be thou uninjured by this tvater of discovery, over which 

20 an imprecation is to be made: but if thou hast transgressed, being 
a married woman, or art 'polluted, and any person besides thy hus- 

21 band hath lain with thee, (then the priest shall adjure the wo- 
man with solemn imprecations, and the priest shall say to the 
woman) the Lord make thee a curse and an imprecation in the 
midst of thy people, by causing thy thigh to rot, and thy belly 

22 to be inflamed. Let this water over which this imprecation is 
made, go into thy belly, to inflame thy belly, and rot thy thigh. 

23 And the woman shall say, Amen, Amen. Then the priest shall 
write these curses in a book, and dip it in the water of disco- 

24 very, over which the imprecation was made, and shall cause 
the woman to drink the water of discovery, over which the 
imprecation was made. And the water of discovery, over which 

25 the imprecation was made, shall go into her — (The priest shall 
take the sacrifice of jealousy out of the woman's hand, and lay 

2b' the sacrifice before the Lord, and offer it on the altar ; and when 
the priest shall have taken a handful of the sacrifice, the memo- 
rial of it, and offered it on the altar, after this he shall cause the 

27 woman to drink the water) and it shall come to pass that if she 



!-!-! VI. NUMBERS. 

be defiled, and escape the notice of her husband, when the water 
of discovery, over which the imprecation was made, shall go in- 
to her, it shall inflame her belly, and her thigh shall rot, and the 

28 woman shall be a curse among her people. But if the woman be 
not polluted, and be pure, she shall be uninjured, and shall con- 

29 ceive seed. This is the law of jealousy, when a woman who is 
married transgresseth and is polluted ; or when a spirit of jea- 

30 lousy cometh on a man. When he is jealous of her, and shall 
set his wife before the Lord, the priest shall do to her all that 
this law directeth ; so shall the man be free from sin, and the 
woman shall bear her iniquity. 

VI. Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 

2 children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, When a man 
or a woman shall make a solemn vow to preserve the strictest 
purity for the Lord, they must abstain from wine, and strong 

3 drink. Such a one shall not drink vinegar made of wine, nor 
vinegar made of strong drink ; nor shall such a one drink any 
thing made of the grape ; nor eat any grapes, fresh pulled, or 

4 dryed, all the days of the vow. From every thing produced 
from the grape, including wine ; from the pulp to the stone, 

5 such a one shall abstain all the days of the purification. A ra- 
zor shall not come upon his head, until the days which he hath 

6 vowed to the Lord be fulfilled. Being hallowed, he shall let 
the hair of his head grow all the days of his vow to the Lord. 

7 He shall not come near any dead body. For a father or a mo- 
ther, or for a brother or a sister, if they chance to die, he shall 

8 not defile himself ; for the vow of his God is on his head. All 

9 the days of his vow he shall be holy to the Lord. And if any 
one die suddenly by him, the head of his vow will be immedi- 
ately defiled, he shall therefore shave his head on the day when 

10 he is cleansed. On the seventh day it shall be shaved, and on 
the eighth day he shall bring two turtle doves, or two young 
pigeons to the priest, to the doors of the tabernacle of the tes- 

11 timony ; and the priest shall offer one for a sin offering, and 
the other for a whole burnt offering ; and the priest shall make 
atonement for him for the failures of which he hath been guilty 

12 by the dead. And on that day he shall hallow r his head which 
was consecrated to the Lord, for the days of his vow, and 
bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass offering : And the 



!-!-! YTT. NUMBERS. 

former days shall not be counted, because the head of his 
13 vow was defiled. Now this is the law of him who hath made 
1 1 the vow — When the days of his vow are fulfilled ; he shall bring 
to the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony and present as 
his gift to the Lord, a lamb of the first year without blemish 
for a whole burnt offering, and a ewe lamb of the first year with- 
out blemish, for a sin offering, and a ram without blemish for 
15 an offering of thanksgiving, and a basket of unleavened bread, 
of fine flour — the loaves tempered with oil, and unleavened 
cakes anointed with oil, and their sacrifice of flour and their 
10 libation : and the priest shall offer them before the Lord. When 
he hath offered the sin offering and the whole burnt offering, 

17 he shall then offer the ram, the sacrifice of thanksgiving to the 
Lord, with the basket of unleavened bread. And when the 
priest hath offered the sacrifice thereof, and the libation thereof, 

18 then he who made the vow shall have the head of his vow shav- 
ed at the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony, and shall lay 
the hairs on the fire which is under the sacrifice of thanksgiv- 

19 ing. And the priest shall take the boiled shoulder from the ram, 
and one unleavened loaf from the basket, and one unleavened 
cake, and lay them on the hands of him who made the vow, 

20 after he hath shaved his consecrated head ; and the priest shall 
offer these as a dedication laid on hands before the Lord. It 
shall be consecrated for the priest, over and above the breast, 
which was dedicated by being laid on hands, and the shoulder 
which was dedicated by setting it apart. And after these things, 

21 he who made the vow may drink wine. This is the law for 
him who hath made the vow — who may have vowed to the 
Lord — his gift to the Lord for his vow, besides what he may 
be able to do more, according to the nature of the vow which 
he may have made, according to the law of strict purity. 

22 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to 

23 Aaron and his sons and say, In this manner you shall bless 

24 the children of Israel, saying, The Lord bless thee and keep 

25 thee — The Lord make his countenance to shine upon thee, 
20 and be gracious to thee — The Lord lift up his countenance 
27 upon thee, and give thee peace. So they shall put my name on 

the children of Israel ; and I the Lord will bless them. 
VII. Now on the day when Moses finished the rearing up of 



!-!-! VII. NUMBERS. 

the tabernacle, he anointed it, and hallowed it, and all the imple- 

2 ments thereof ; and the altar, and all its utensils ; and when he 
had anointed them, and hallowed them, the chiefs of Israel, 
the twelve chiefs of the houses of their head families who were 
the chiefs of the tribes, the same who attended at the review, 

3 made an offering, and brought as their gifts before the Lord, 
six covered waggons, and twelve oxen, a waggon from two 

4 chiefs, and an ox from each one. And when they had brought 

5 them before the Lord, the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Re- 
ceive them from them, and they shall be for the works of the 
service of the tabernacle of the testimony ; and thou shalt give 
them to the Levites, to each community according to their 

6 service. So Moses, having taken the waggons and the oxen, 

7 gave them to the Levites — he gave two waggons and four ox- 

8 en to the Gersonites, according to their service ; and four wag- 
gons and eight oxen, he gave to the Merarites, according to 

9 their service, by Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. But to 
the Kaathites he gave none, because they having the sacred 
services of the sanctuary, are to carry on their shoulders. 

10 The chiefs tendered also an offering for the dedication of 
the altar, on the day he anointed it. But when the chiefs 
brought their gift over against the altar, at some distance from 

11 it, the Lord said to Moses, One chief a day. Let them bring 
forward, every chief his gifts on his day, for the dedication of 

12 the altar. So he who brought forward his gifts on the first day, 

13 was Naasson, son of Aminadab chief of the tribe of Judas ; 
and he offered as his gift, one silver charger, the weight of 
which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver cup of se- 
venty shekels after the holy shekel, both full of fine flour, mix- 
ed up with oil, for a sacrifice ; one censer, of ten shekels of 
gold, full of incense ; one young bull from the herd, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a whole burnt offering, and one 
kid of the goats for a sin offering, and for a sacrifice of thanks- 
giving, two heifers, five rams, five he-goats, five ewe lambs of 
the first year. This was the gift of Naasson, son of Aminadab. 

18 On the second day Nathaniel, son of Sogar, the chief of 
the tribe of Issachar made his offering; and lie presented as 
his gift, one silver charger, the weight of which was a hundred 
and thirty shekels ; one silver cup of seventy shekels after the 



!-!-! VII. NUMBERS. 

holy shekel, both full of fine flour, mixed up with oil for a sa- 
crifice ; oue censer of ten shekels of gold full of incense ; one 
young bull from the herd, one ram, one lamb of the first year 
for a whole burnt offering, and one kid of the goats, for a sin 
offering ; and for a sacrifice of thanksgiving, two heifers, five 
rams, five he-goats, five ewe lambs of the first year. This was 
the gift of Nathaniel son of Sogar. 

24 On the third day the chief of the Zabulonites, Eliab, son of 
Chailon, offered as his gift one silver charger, the weight of 
which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver cup of se- 
venty shekels after the holy shekel, both full of fine flour made 
up with oil for a sacrifice; one censer of ten shekels of gold, 
full of incense ; one young bull from the herd, one ram, one 
lamb of the first year for a whole burnt offering, and one kid 
of the goats for a sin offering ; and for a sacrifice of thanks- 
giving, two heifers, five rams, five he-goats, five ewe lambs of 
the first year. This was the gift of Eliab, son of Chailon. 

30 On the fourth day the chief of the Reubenites, Elisur son 
of Sedur, offered as his gift one silver charger the weight of 
which was a hundred and thirty shekels ; one silver cup of se- 
venty shekels, after the holy shekel, both full of fine flour made 
up with oil for a sacrifice ; one censer of ten shekels of gold, 
full of incense ; one young bull from the herd, one ram, one 
lamb of the first year for a whole burnt offering ; one kid of 
the goats for a sin offering ; and for a sacrifice of thanksgiving, 
two heifers, five rams, five he-goats, five ewe lambs of the first 
year. This was the gift of Elisur son of Sedur. 

36 On the fifth day the chief of the Symeonites, Salamiel, son 
of Surisadai, offered as his gift one silver charger, the weight 
of which was a hundred and thirty shekels ; one silver cup of 
seventy shekels after the holy shekel, both full of fine flour 
made up with oil for a sacrifice ; one censer of ten shekels of 
gold, full of incense ; one young bull from the herd, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year for a whole burnt offering, and one 
kid of the goats for a sin offering ; and for a sacrifice of thanks- 
giving, two heifers, five rams, five he-goats, five ewe lambs 
of the first year. This was the gift of Salamiel, son of Surisadai. 

42 On the sixth day the chief of the Gadites, Elisaph son of 
Raguel, offered as his gift, one silver charger, the weight of 

VOL. I. G £ 



!-!-! VII. NUMBERS. 

which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver cup of se- 
venty shekels, after the holy shekel, both full of fine flour made 
up with oil for a sacrifice ; one censer of ten shekels of gold, 
full of incense ; one young bull from the herd, one ram, one 
lamb of the first year, for a whole burnt offering, and one kid 
of the goats for a sin offering ; and for a sacrifice of thanksgiv- 
ing, two heifers, five rams, five he-goats, five ewe lambs of 
the first year. This was the gift of Elisaph, son of Eaguel. 

48 On the seventh day the chief of the Ephraimites, Elisama, 
son of Emiud, offered as his gift one silver charger, the 
weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels ; one silver 
cup of seventy shekels, after the holy shekel, both full of fine 
flour made up with oil for a sacrifice ; one censer of ten shekels 
of gold, full of incense ; one young bull from the herd, one 
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a whole burnt offering, and 
one kid of the goats for a sin offering ; and, for a sacrifice of 
thanksgiving, two heifers, iiye rams, five he-goats, five ewe 
lambs of the first year. This was the gift of Elisama, son of 
Emiud. 

54 On the eighth day the chief of the children of Manasses, 
Gamaliel, son of Phadassur, offered as his gift, one silver 
charger, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels ; 
one silver cup of seventy shekels, after the holy shekel, both 
full of fine flour, made up with oil for a sacrifice, one censer 
of ten shekels of gold, full of incense ; one young bull from the 
herd, one ram, one lamb of the first year for a whole burnt 
offering, and one kid of the goats, for a sin offering ; and for 
a sacrifice of thanksgiving, two heifers, five rams, five he- 
goats, five ewe lambs of the first year. This was the gift of 
Gamaliel, son of Phadassur. 

60 On the ninth day the chief of the Benjaminites, Abidan, son 
of Gadeoni, offered as his gift, one silver charger, the weight 
of which was a hundred and thirty shekels ; one silver cup of 
seventy shekels, after the holy shekel, both full of fine flour 
made up with oil for a sacrifice ; one censer of two shekels of 
gold, full of incense ; one young bull of the herd, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year for a whole burnt offering ; and one 
kid of the goats for a sin offering ; and for a sacrifice of thanks- 
giving, two heifers, five rams, five lie-goats, five ewe lambs 



!-!-! VII. NUMBEKS. 

of the first year. This was the gift of Abidan, son of Gadeoni. 

66 On the tenth clay, the chief of the Danites, Achieser, son 
of Amisadai, offered as his gift, one silver charger the weight of 
which was a hundred and thirty shekels ; one silver cup of se- 
venty shekels, after the holy shekel, both full of fine flour, 
made up with oil for a sacrifice; one censer of ten shekels of 
gold, full of incense ; one young bull from the herd, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a whole burnt offering, and one 
kid of the goats for a sin offering ; and for a sacrifice of thanks- 
giving, two heifers, five rams, five he-goats, five ewe lambs of 
the first year. This was the gift of Achieser, son of Ainisadai. 

72 On the eleventh day, the chief of the Aserites, Phagael, son 
of Echran, offered as his gift, one silver charger, the weight of 
which was a hundred and thirty shekels ; one silver cup of se- 
venty shekels, after the holy shekel, both full of fine flour, 
made up with oil, for a sacrifice ; one censer of ten shekels of 
gold, full of incense ; one young bull from the herd, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a whole burnt offering ; and one 
kid of the goats for a sin offering ; and for a sacrifice of thanks- 
giving, two heifers, five rams, five he-goats, five ewe lambs of 
the first year. This was the gift of Phagael, son of Echran. 

78 On the twelfth day, the chief of the Xephthaleimites, Achire, 
son of Ainan, offered as his gift, one silver charger, the weight 
of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver cup of 
seventy shekels, after the holy shekel, both full of fine flour 
made up with oil for a sacrifice ; one censer of ten shekels of 
gold, full of incense; one young bull from the herd, one ram, 
one lamb of the first year, for a whole burnt offering ; and one 
kid of the goats for a sin offering ; and for a sacrifice of thanks- 
giving, two heifers, five rams, five he-goats, five ewe lambs of 
the first year. This was the gift of Achire, son of Ainan. 

84 This was the dedication of the altar, when he anointed it, 
from the chiefs of the Israelites, twelve silver chargers, twelve 

85 silver cups, twelve censers of gold, each charger one hundred 
and thirty shekels, and each cup seventy shekels, all the silver 

86 of these vessels, two thousand four hundred shekels, and the 
shekels were after the holy shekel ; twelve golden censers, full 
of incense ; all the gold of the censers was one hundred and 

87 twenty shekels. All the cattle for the whole burnt offering 



!-!-! VIII. NUMBERS. 

were twelve young bulls, twelve rams, twelve lambs of the 
first year, with their sacrifices of flour and their libations; and 

88 twelve kids of the goats for the sin offering. All the cattle for 
the sacrifice of thanksgiving, were twenty four heifers, sixty 
rams, sixty he-goats, sixty ewe lambs of the first year, without 
blemish. This was the dedication of the altar. 

89 After filling his own hands, and after the anointing, when 
Moses went into the tabernacle of the testimony to speak to the 
Lord, he heard the voice of the Lord speaking to him, from 
above the propitiatory, which is over the ark of the testimony, 
between the two cherubims, and he answered him, and the 

VIII. Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to Aaron, and thou 

2 shalt say to him, When thou hast put on the side lamps, the 
seven lamps shall give light in a range with the front of the 

3 candlestick. And Aaron did so. On each side, on a range 
with the front of the candlestick, he lighted the lamps thereof 

4 as the Lord commanded Moses. Now the workmanship of 
the candlestick was of solid gold ; both its stem, and its lillies, 
were of one solid piece. He had made the candlestick accord- 
ing to the pattern which the Lord shewed Moses. 

5 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Take the Le- 

6 vites from among the children of Israel, and purify them. And 

7 in this manner thou shalt perform their purification. Thou shalt 
sprinkle them with the water of purification, and a razor shall 
pass over their whole body, and they shall wash their clothes, 

8 and they will be clean. Then they shall take a young bull from 
the herd, with his sacrifice, to wit, fine flour mixed up with oil ; 
and thou shalt take a yearling bull from the herd for a sin of- 

9 fering, and bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the testi- 

10 mony, and assemble all the congregation of Israel's sons, and 
present the Levites before the Lord. And the sons of Israel 

11 shall lay their hands on the Levites ; and Aaron shall set the 
Levites apart before the Lord, as a gift from the sons of Israel ; 
and they shall be set apart to perform the works of the Lord. 

12 Then the Levites shall lay their hands on the head of the 
young bulls. And thou shalt offer the one for a sin offering, 
and the other for a whole burnt offering, to make atonement 

13 for them. Then thou shalt place the Levites before the Lord, 
and before Aaron and before his sons, and give them as a gift 



Oli. IX. NUMBERS. 

14 before the Lord. 80 thou shalt separate the Levites from 
among the children of Israel, and they shall belong to me. 

15 And after this, the Levites shall go in to do the works of the 
tabernacle of the testimony, when thou hast purified them, and 

16 given them up before the Lord. Because they are solemnly 
given up to me from among the children of Israel ; I have 
taken them for myself from among the children of Israel, in- 
stead of all the males who are the first born of their mothers. 

17 Because every first born among the children of Israel, whether 

18 of man or beast, belongeth to me (on the day when I smote 
all the first born in the land of Egypt, I hallowed them for 
myself) and I have taken the Levites instead of all the first 

19 born among the children of Israel, and have given the Levites 
as a gift to Aaron and his sons, from among the children of Is- 
rael, to do the works of the children of Israel at the tabernacle 
of the testimony, and to make atonement for the children of 
Israel ; therefore none among the children of Israel shall come 
near the Holies. 

20 So Moses and Aaron, and all the congregation of the chil- 
dren of Israel, did to the Levites as the Lord commanded Mo- 
ses in respect to them. 

21 Now when the children of Israel had done so to them, and 
the Levites were purified, and had washed their clothes, and 
Aaron had solemnly given them up in the presence of the 

22 Lord, and had made atonement for them to purify them ; and, 
after this, the Levites had gone in to perform their service in 
the tabernacle of the testimony, in the presence of Aaron and 
his sons — when they had done thus for the Levites, as the Lord 
had commanded Moses in respect to them ; then the Lord 

23 spoke to Moses, saying, There is this further in respect to the 

24 Levites — from twenty five years and upwards, they shall go in 

25 to perform service at the tabernacle of the testimony ; but af- 
ter fifty years of age, they are to be withdrawn from the ser- 

26 vice, and work no more. As brothers, they are to keep watch 
at the tabernacle of the testimony, but not to perform labo- 
rious work. In this manner thou shalt dispose of the Levites 
among their watches. 

IX. Now in the second year after their coming out of the land of 
Egypt, in the first month, the Lord spoke to Moses in the 



!-!-! IX. NUMBERS. 

2 wilderness of Sina, saying, Give orders, and let the children of 

3 Israel keep the passover in its appointed season. On the four- 
teenth day of this first month, towards evening, thou shalt cele- 
brate it in its season. According to its rites, and according to 

4 its institution, thou shalt celebrate it. Accordingly Moses 
spoke to the children of Israel to keep the passover on the 

5 fourteenth day of the first month, in the wilderness of Sina. 
And when the children of Israel were doing as the Lord com- 

6 manded Moses, there were some men who were defiled by the 
dead body of a man, and could not keep the passover ; so 
these men came to Moses and Aaron on that day, and said to 

7 them, We are defiled by the dead body of a man, must we 
therefore be deprived of the opportunity of offering our gift to 
the Lord, in its appointed season, among the children of Israel : 

8 whereupon Moses said to them, Stand here ; and I will hear 

9 what the Lord will command concerning you. Then the Lord 
spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the children of Israel, and 

10 say, If any man among you, or among your posterity, happen 
to be defiled by the dead, or be on a far distant journey, he 

11 shall keep the passover to the Lord in the second month. On 
the fourteenth day they shall keep it towards evening. They 

12 shall eat it with unleavened bread, and bitter herbs ; they shall 
not leave any of it till the morning ; nor shall they break a 

13 bone of it. They shall keep it according to the ritual of the pass- 
over. And if any man be clean, and not on a distant journey, 
and fail to keep the passover, that soul shall be cut off from 
among his people ; because he did not offer this gift to the 

14 Lord, in its appointed time, such a man shall bear his sin. And 
if there come to you a proselyte in your land, and he chuse to 
keep the passover to the Lord, he must keep it according to 
its ritual, and according to its institution. You shall have one 
law for the proselyte and for him born in the land. 

15 Now on the day when the tabernacle was erected, the cloud 
covered the tabernacle — the house of the testimony : and in 
the evening there was over the tabernacle an appearance like 
that of fire, which continued till the morning. Thus it was con- 

16 tinually. The cloud covered it by day : and there was an ap- 

17 pearance of fire during the night. And when the cloud ascend- 
ed from the tabernacle, the Israelites thereupon began their 



!-!-! X. NUMBERS. 

march ; and at what place soever the cloud halted there the Is- 

18 raelites encamped. By the command of the Lord the Israelites 
were to encamp, and by the command of the Lord, they were 
to march. All the time the cloud overshadowed the taberna- 

19 cle, the Israelites were to continue encamped. And when the 
cloud was continued over the tabernacle many days, the Israel- 

20 ites were to keep the watch of their God, and not remove. And 
such was to be the case when the cloud overshadowed the ta- 
bernacle but a few days. At the command of the Lord, they 
were to encamp ; and at the command of the Lord, they were to 

21 march. And this was to be the case when the cloud was from 
evening till morning. When the cloud ascended in the morn- 
ning, they were to take up their march, whether it was day or 

22 night. But while the cloud continued to overshadow it, even 
for a month or more, the Israelites were to continue encamped, 
and not remove. 

23 Because at the command of the Lord, they were to move, 
and at the command of the Lord, by the ministry of Moses, 
they kept the watch of the Lord ; therefore the Lord spoke to 

X. Moses, saying, Make for thyself two silver trumpets. Thou 

2 shalt make them of ductile silver, each beaten out of one piece. 
And they shall serve thee to assemble the congregation, and to 

3 cause the camps to remove. When thou shalt blow with them, 

4 all the congregation shall assemble at the door of the taberna- 
cle of the testimony ; but when one is blown, all the chiefs, the 

5 leaders of Israel, shall come to thee. When you blow an alarm, 

6 the camps on the east shall begin their march ; and when you 
blow a second alarm, the camps on the south shall begin their 
march ; and when you blow a third alarm, the camps on the 
west shall begin their march ; and when you blow a fourth 

7 alarm, the camps on the north shall begin their march. They 
shall blow an alarm for their marching. And when you would 
assemble the congregation, you are to blow with them, but not 

8 an alarm. The sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow the trum- 
pets. This shall be a perpetual ordinance for you, throughout 

9 your generations. And when you go out to battle in your 
land, against your enemies, who have risen up against you, 
you shall sound these trumpets, that you may be brought into 
remembrance before the Lord, and saved from your enemies. 



!-!-! X. NUMBERS. 

10 In the days of your rejoicings also, and at your festivals, and 
at your new moons, you shall blow the trumpets, at your 
whole burnt offerings, and at your sacrifices of thanksgivings ; 
and it shall be a calling of you into remembrance before the 
Lord — I the Lord your God. 

11 Now in the second year, in the second month, on the twen- 
tieth day of the month, the cloud ascended from the tabernacle 

12 of the testimony ; whereupon the Israelites with their baggage, 
marched through the wilderness of Sina, and the cloud halted 

13 in the wilderness of Pharan. When the first had begun their 

14 march — when the van, the division of the camp of Judas, had 

15 marched, and at the head of it Naasson son of Aminadab, and 

16 at the head of the army of the tribe of Issachar, Nathaniel son 
of Sogar, and at the head of the army of the tribe of Zabulon, 

17 Eliab son of Chailon; then were the Gersonites, and the Me- 
rarites, having taken down the tabernacle, to move on, carry - 

18 ing the tabernacle. And when the division of the camp of 
Reuben had marched with their army, and at the head of it 

19 Elisur son of Sedur ; and at the head of the army of the tribe 

20 of Symeon, Salamiel son of Surisadai ; and at the head of the 

21 army of the tribe of Gad, Elisaph son of Raguel, then were 
the Kaathites to move on, carrying the holy things, so that 

22 the tabernacle might be set up when they arrived. Then were 
to march the division of the camp of Ephraim, with their ar- 

23 my, and at the head of it Elisama son of Emiud ; and at the 
head of the army of the tribe of Manasses, Gamaliel son of 

24 Phadassur ; and at the head of the army of the tribe of Benja- 

25 min, Abidan son of Gadeoni. And the division of the camp 
of Dan were to march the last of all the camps, with their ar- 

26 my, and at the head of it Achiezer son of Amisadai ; and at the 

27 head of the army of the tribe of Aser, Phagael son of Echran ; 

28 and at the head of the army of the tribe of Nephthaleim, Achire 
son of Ainan. These were the armies of the Israelites. 

29 Now when they began their march Moses said to Obad, 
son of Raguel the Madianite, the brother in law of Moses, 
We are now on our march to the place which the Lord said, 
This I will give you. Come with us and we will deal well with 
thee ; for the Lord hath spoken good things concerning Israel. 

30 In reply to which he said, I cannot go, but must return to my 



!-!-! XL NUMBERS. 

31 own land, and to my family. Whereupon Moses said, Thou 
must not leave us. Because thou hast been with us in the 
wilderness, therefore thou shalt be a senator among us, and 

32 shalt share — if thou go with us, thou shalt indeed share in all 
those good things which the Lord will bestow upon us, and 
we will deal kindly with thee. 

33 So they removed from the mount of the Lord, three days' 
journey, and the ark of the covenant of the Lord went before 
them the three days' journey, to look out for them a resting 

35 place. And when the ark set forward Moses said, Arise, O 
Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered. Let them who hate thee 

36 be put to flight. And when it halted he said, Return, Lord, 
to the thousand myriads of Israel. 

34 Now while the cloud was overshadowing them by day, 
as they marched out of the camp, the people were wickedly 

XL murmuring before the Lord, and the Lord heard, and was 
provoked to wrath, and a fire from the Lord was kindled 

2 among them, and was consuming part of the camp, whereupon 
the people cried to Moses, and he prayed to the Lord, and 

3 the fire ceased. So the name of that place was called Burn- 
ing, because a fire from the Lord had been kindled among 
them. 

4 Again the mixed multitude which was among them had 
a longing desire, and even the children of Israel sat down and 

5 wept, saying, Who will give us flesh to eat. We recollect the 
fish which we ate in Egypt for nothing ; and the cucumbers, and 
the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the cloves of 

6 garlick ; but now our soul is dried up, and our eyes behold 

7 nothing but this manna. Now the manna was like a grain of 
coriander, and its colour was the colour of chrystal, and the 

8 people went out, and gathered it and ground it in mills, or beat 
it in mortars, and boiled it in pots, or made it up into cakes to 
be baked on the hearth ; and in sweetness its taste was that of a 

9 sweet cake, made with oil ; and when the dew fell on the camp 
the manna came down with it. 

10 When Moses heard them weeping in their communities, 
every one at his tent door, though the Lord was greatly pro- 
voked to wrath, and in the view of Moses it was evil, yet 

11 Moses said to the Lord, Why hast thou afflicted thy servant ; 

VOL. I. H h 



Oh. XI. NUMBERS. 

and why have I not found favour in thy sight, that thou 

12 shouldst lay upon me the weight of this people ? Have I con- 
ceived all this people ? Or have I brought them forth, that 
thou sayest to me, Take them in thy bosom, and carry them, 
as a nurse would her sucking child, to the land which with 

13 an oath thou hast promised to their fathers? Whence can I 
have flesh to give to all this people ? For they weep before me, 

14 saying, Give us flesh that we may eat. I am not able alone to 

15 bear this people. It is a burden too heavy for me. If thou 
deal thus with me, kill me outright, if I have found favour in 

16 thy sight, that I may not see my wretchedness. Whereupon 
the Lord said to Moses, Assemble before me seventy men 
of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be elders of the 
people, and their scribes ; and bring them to the tabernacle 

17 of the testimony, and let them stand there with thee ; and I 
will come down and talk with thee there, and I will take a 
portion of the spirit which is upon thee, and put it upon 
them ; and they will help thee to bear the burden of this people, 

18 so that thou shalt not bear them thyself alone. And thou 
shalt say to this people, Sanctify yourselves against to-morrow, 
and you shall eat flesh. Because you have wept before the 
Lord, saying, Who can give us flesh to eat ? It is better for 
us to be in Egypt ; therefore the Lord will give you flesh to 

19 eat, and you shall eat flesh. You shall eat it, not one day, nor 
two days, nor five days, nor ten nor twenty days. You shall 

20 eat it a whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and 
become loathsome to you, because you have distrusted the 
Lord who is amongst you, and have wept in his presence, 
and said, Why did we come out of Egypt. Thereupon Moses 

21 said, The people among whom I am, are six hundred thou- 
sand footmen, yet thou hast said, I will give them flesh to eat, 

22 and they shall eat it a whole month. Must the flocks and the 
herds be slaughtered for them? Will even these suffice? Or 
should all the fish of the sea be collected for them, would this be 

23 sufficient for them ? And the Lord said to Moses, Cannot the 
hand of the Lord furnish a sufficiency ? Thou shalt now see whe- 

24 ther my word shall come to pass to thee or not. Then Moses went 
out, and told the people the words of the Lord. And when he 
had assembled seventy men from among the elders of the peo- 



!-!-! XII. NUMBERS. 

pie, and placed them around the tabernacle, the Lord descend- 

25 ed in a cloud, and spoke to him, and took a portion of the spi- 
rit which was upon him, and put it on the seventy elders. And 

26 soon as the spirit rested on them, they prophesied. Now there 
were two who had not joined them, but were left in the camp. 
The name of the one was Eldad and the name of the other, 
Modad ; and the spirit rested on them. They were of those 
who were written down, but they had not come to the taber- 

27 nacle. And when they prophesied in the camp, there ran a 

28 young man, who told Moses, saying, Eldad and Modad are 
prophesying in the camp. Upon which Joshua the son of 
Nave, who was the chosen attendant of Moses, addressing 

29 him said, My lord Moses, forbid them. But Moses said to 
him, Thou shouldst not envy, on my account. that the 
people of the Lord had all been made prophets when the Lord 

30 put his spirit on these ! Then Moses went into the camp, ac- 

31 companied with the elders of Israel ; and there went forth a 
wind from the Lord, and brought a flock of quails from the sea, 
and drove them upon the camp, a day's journey on this side, 
and a day's journey on that side, all around the camp about 

32 two cubits from the ground. Whereupon the people arose, 
and all that day, and all that night, and all the next day, they 
gathered the flocks of quails, and he who gathered the fewest 

33 collected ten cores. Though they had heated for themselves 
kilns all around the camp, the flesh was already between their 
teeth before it was quite dead. Whereupon the wrath of the 
Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the 

34 people with a very great plague, so that the name of that place 
was called Monuments of longing desire; because they had 
there buried the people who had expressed such a longing 
desire. 

35 From the Monuments of longing desire, the people removed 
XII. to Aseroth ; and while they were at Aseroth, Mariam and 

Aaron spoke against Moses, because of the Ethiopian woman 

2 whom Moses had taken ; because he had taken to wife an 
Ethiopian woman, therefore they said, Hath the Lord spoken 

3 to Moses only ? Hath he not spoken to us also ? (Now the 
man Moses was very meek, above all the men on the earth,) 
And when the Lord heard, the Lord immediately said to 31 o- 



!-!-! XIII. NUMBERS. 

ses, and Aaron, and Mariam. Come forth you three to the ta- 

4 bernacle of the testimony. And when they three came out to 

5 the tabernacle of the testimony, the Lord descended in a pillar 
of cloud, and stood at the door of the tabernacle of the testi- 

6 mony, and Aaron and Mariam were called. And when they 
both came out he said to them, Hear my words. If there be a 
prophet among you to the Lord, I will make myself known to 

7 him by a vision, and speak to him in sleep. Not so with respect 

8 to my servant Moses. In all my house he is faithful. Mouth to 
mouth, I will speak to him personally, and not in dark senten- 
ces. He hath actually seen the glory of God. Why then were 
ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses. 

9 And the wrath of the Lord was upon them, and the cloud 
withdrew from the tabernacle, and behold Mariam was le- 

10 prous like snow. When Aaron looked on Mariam, and be- 
hold she was leprous, he said to Moses, O my lord, impute 

11 not sin to us, because we have acted ignorantly — because we 

12 have sinned, Let her not be as dead, as an abortive, for it de- 

13 voureth the half of her flesh. Whereupon Moses cryed to the 

14 Lord, saying, God, I beseech thee, heal her. And the Lord 
said to Moses, If her father had spit in her face, would she 
not be ashamed seven days ? Let her be set apart seven days, 

15 without the camp, and after that let her come in. So Mariam 
was set apart without the camp, seven days, and the people did 

XIII. not remove till Mariam was cleansed. And after this 
the people removed from Aseroth, and encamped in the wil- 

2 derness of Pharan. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, 
Send men, and let them examine for thee the land of the Cha- 
nanites, which I am about to give to the children of Israel for 
a possession. Thou shalt send a man for every tribe ; accord- 
ing to the communities of their patriarchal families, thou shalt 
send them, every one a leader among them. 

3 So Moses sent them from the wilderness of Pharan, by the 

4 command of the Lord. All the men were principal officers of 
the children of Israel, and these were their names — Of the 
tribe of Reuben, Samuel, son of Zachur ; of the tribe of Sy- 
meon, Saphat, son of Suri ; Of the tribe of Judas, Chaleb, son 
of Jephonne ; of the tribe of Issachar, Ilaal, son of Joseph ; 
of the tribe of Ephraim, Ause, son of Nave ; of the tribe of Ben- 



!-!-! XIII. NUMBERS. 

jamin, Phalti, son of Raphu ; of the tribe of Zabulon, Gudiel, 
son of Sudi ; of the tribe of Joseph — of the Manassites, Gad- 
di, son of Susi ; of the tribe of Dan, Amiel, son of Gamali ; of 
the tribe of Aser, Sathur, son of Michael ; of the tribe of 
Nephthaleim, Nabi, son of Sabi ; of the tribe of Gad, Gudiel, 
son of Makchi. 

16 These were the names of the men whom Moses sent to exa- 
mine the land : (now Moses had surnamed Anse, son of Nave, 

17 Joshua.) And upon sending them to view the land of Ohanaan, 

18 Moses said to them, Having gone up through this wilderness, 
you shall go up to the mountain, and view the land, of what sort 
it is; and the people who are settled in it, whether they be 

19 strong or weak ; whether few or many ; and what sort of a 
country it is in which they are settled, whether it is good or 
bad ; and what sort of cities they inhabit, whether they dwell 

20 in cities with walls, or without walls ; and what the quality of the 
soil is, whether rich or poor ; and whether there are trees there, 
or not. And having made a strict examination, you will bring 
with you some of the fruits of the land : (for their days, it being 
then the spring season, would reach to the time of the first ripe 

21 grapes.) So they went up, and viewed the country from the 

22 wilderness of Sin, as far as Roob on the way to Aimath. Then 
they went up, on a course parallel with the front of the desart ; 
then turned down to Chebron, where were the Achimans and 
the Sessians, and the Thelamins, descendants of Enach. Now 

23 Chebron was built seven years before Tanis in Egypt. And 
having come to the valley of grapes, and viewed it, they cut 
there a branch with a cluster of grapes on it, and carried it on 

24 poles, with some pomegranates and figs : and they called the 
name of that place, Valley of Grapes; because of the bunch 

25 of grapes which the children of Israel cut there. And having 
viewed the land, they set out thence on their return, after forty 

26 days, and journeying on came to Moses and Aaron, and to all 
the congregation of the Israelites in the wilderness of Pharan 
Kades, and made report to them and to all the congregation, 

27 and shewed them the fruit of the land. And they gave him a 
minute detail and said, We went to the country to which thou 
didst send us, a land flowing with milk and honey, and this 

28 is the fruit of it. But nevertheless because the nation which 



!-!-! XIV. NUMBERS. 

inhabiteth it is bold and the cities strong, defended with walls, 
and very large, and we have seen there the race of Enach ; and 

29 the Amalekites dwell in the land to the south, and the Chet- 
tites, and the Evites, and the Jebusites, and the Amorites, in- 
habit the hilly country ; and the Chananites dwell on the sea 

30 shore, and along the river Jordan — (Here Chaleb stilled the 
people before Moses, and said, We have only to go up, and 

31 we shall possess it, for we are stronger than they. But the men 
who went up with him said) We will not go up ; for we are not 
able to go up against that nation ; for it is much more power- 

32 fill than we are. And they gave an astonishing account of the 
land w r hich they had viewed, to the children of Israel, saying, 
The land through which we passed to view it, is a land 
which devoureth them who dwell therein ; and all the people 

33 which we saw are men of immense stature. There indeed we 
XIV. saw the giants, and we were before them like grasshop- 
pers — indeed we were nothing else before them. Upon this, 
all the congregation, raising their voices, shouted aloud, and 

2 the people wept that whole night. And all the Israelites mur- 
mured against Moses and Aaron ; and the whole congregation 
said to them, that we had died in the land of Egypt, or even 

3 in this wilderness ! If we must die, why doth the Lord lead 
us into that land to fall in battle? Our wives and our children 
will be for a prey. Now therefore it is better for us to return 

4 to Egypt. Then they said to one another, Let us appoint a 

5 leader, and return to Egypt. Upon this Moses and Aaron fell 
on their faces before all the congregation of the children of Is- 

6 rael, and Joshua the son of Xave, and Chaleb the son of Je- 
phonne, two of them who had viewed the land, rent their 

7 clothes, and spoke to all the congregation of the Israelites, say- 

8 ing, The land which we viewed is indeed a most excellent 
land. If the Lord delighteth in us, he will lead us to that land, 

9 and give it to us. It is a land flowing with milk and honey. 
Only rebel not against the Lord, and you need not be afraid of 
the people of the land, for they are food for us. For their time 

10 is over, and the Lord is with us. Fear them not. And when 
all the congregation ordered to stone them with stones, the 
glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud, over the tabernacle 

11 of the testimony, to all the children of Israel. And the Lord 



Cb. XIV. NUMBERS. 

said to Moses, How long shall this people provoke me ? And 
how long will they disbelieve me, notwithstanding all the mi- 

12 racles which I have done among them ? Let me smite them 
with pestilence and destroy them, and I will make thee and 
the house of thy father a great nation and much more nume- 

13 rous than this. Thereupon Moses said to the Lord, Though 
Egypt may publish that thou by thy mighty power didst bring 

14 this people out from among them — Nay though all the inhabi- 
tants of this land have heard that thou the Lord art among this 
people — that they with their eyes may behold thee, Lord, 
exposed to view ; and that thy cloud hath stood over them, and 
that thou marchest before them in a pillar of cloud by day, and 
in a pillar of fire by night ; yet when thou shalt destroy this 

lo people as one man, then will all the nations who have heard of 

16 thy name speak, saying, Because the Lord was not able to 
bring this people into the land which, with an oath, he promised 

17 them, he hath destroyed them in the wilderness. Now 7 there- 
fore let thy power, Lord, be exalted. As thou hast spoken, 
saying, " The Lord is long suffering, abundant in mercy and 

18 true, taking away iniquities, transgressions and sins ; and, when 
he will not by purification clear the guilty, retributing the sins 
of fathers on children to the third and fourth generation," 

19 forgive the sin of this people according to thy great mercy, as 
thou hast been gracious to them from Egypt even to this time. 

20 Then the Lord said to Moses, I am merciful to them accord- 

21 ing to thy word. But as I live, and my name liveth, and the 

22 glory of the Lord shall fill the whole earth ; because all these 
men, who have seen my glory, and the wonders which I have 
done in Egypt, and in this wilderness, have actually tempted 

23 me now the tenth time, and have not hearkened to my voice, 
they indeed shall not see the land which I, with an oath, pro- 
mised their fathers. But with regard to their children who are 
here with me — as many as have not known good or evil — every 
one who is too young to be taught by experience, to them I 

24 will give the land. As for all them who have provoked me, they 
shall not see it ; But with regard to my servant Chaleb, be- 
cause there was a different spirit in him, and he followed me, 
him I will bring into the land to which he went, and his seed 

25 shall inherit it. Now the Amalekites and the Chananites dwell 



!-!-! XI V. NUMBERS. 

in that valley, turn therefore to-morrow, and remove into the 
wilderness by the way to the Red sea. 

26 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 

27 How long shall I bear with this wicked congregation? I have 
heard what they murmur before me — the murmuring of the 
Israelites which they have uttered concerning you, Say to 

28 them, As I live, saith the Lord, As you have spoken in my 

29 hearing, so will I actually do to you. In this wilderness your car- 
casses shall fall — the whole review of you — even all of you who 
have been reviewed, from twenty years old, and upwards, who 

30 have murmured against me. None of you shall come into that 
land, respecting which I stretched forth my hand to cause you 
to dwell therein, save only Chaleb son of Jephonne, and Joshua 

31 son of Nave. But as for your children, which you said would 
be for a prey, them I will bring into the land, and they shall 

32 inherit that land which you have rejected. Your carcasses shall 
fall in this wilderness, and in this wilderness your children shall 

33 be fed forty years. They shall bear your whoredom until your 

34 carcasses are consumed in the wilderness. According to the 
number of days in which you explored the land, counting 
each of the forty days a year, you shall bear your sins forty 
years, and shall know the vengeance of my wrath. I the Lord 

35 have spoken. In this manner I will assuredly deal with this 

36 wicked congregation, which hath risen up against me. In this 
wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die, 
with those men whom Moses sent to view the land, and who, 
on their return, murmured against it before the congregation, 

37 to raise an evil report concerning it. Now the men who spoke 

38 ill against the land were struck dead before the Lord, and Jo- 
shua son of Nave and Chaleb son of Jephonne alone survived 
of all the men who had gone to view the land. 

39 When Moses rehearsed these words to all the children of Is- 

40 rael, the people mourned exceedingly, and rising early the next 
morning they went up to the top of the mountain, saying, Be- 
hold, here we are, we will go up to the place which the Lord 

41 hath said, for we have sinned. Though Moses said, Why do 
you transgress the command of the Lord ? Things will not 

42 prosper with you. Do not go up, for the Lord is not with you. 

43 You will therefore fall before the face of your enemies. Be- 



!-!-! XV. NUMBERS. 

cause the Amalekites and the Chananites are there before you, 
you will therefore fall by the sword. Because you have turned 
back, and disobeyed the Lord, therefore the Lord will not be 

44 among you. Notwithstanding this, they obstinately went up to 
the top of the mountain ; but the ark of the covenant of the 

45 Lord, and Moses, did not depart out of the camp. And the 
Amalekites and the Chananites, who were in ambush on the 
mountain, came down, and drove them back, and smote them 
even to Ermon. So they returned to the camp. 

XV. Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 
2 children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, When you are 
o come into the land of your habitation, which I give you, and 
thou wilt offer whole burnt offerings to the Lord, whether it 
be an offering of homage, or a sacrifice to magnify a vow, or 
a free will offering ; or at your festivals, to make a smell of fra- 
grance to the Lord ; if they be from the herds or the flocks, he 

4 who bringeth his gift to the Lord must also bring for a sacri- 
fice of flour, the tenth of an ephah of fine flour, made up with 

5 the fourth of an hin of oil — and for a libation you shall pour 
the fourth of an hin of wine upon the whole burnt offering, or 
upon the sacrifice ; for every lamb you shall do this, as an of- 

6 fering of homage, a smell of fragrance for the Lord : But for a 
ram, when you offer one, for a whole burnt offering, or for a 
sacrifice, thou shalt offer two tenths of fine flour, made up with 

7 the third of an hin of oil, for a sacrifice : and for a libation you 
shall offer a third of an hin of wine, for a smell of fragrance to 

8 the Lord. And if you make your offering from the herds, for 
a whole burnt offering, or for a sacrifice to magnify a vow, or 

9 for an offering of thanksgiving to the Lord ; he who offereth 
must bring, with the young bull, three tenths of fine flour mix- 

10 ed up with the half of anjiin of oil, for a sacrifice; and the half 
of an hin of wine for a libation, as an offering of homage, a 

11 smell of fragrance for the Lord. Thus thou shalt do for every 
young bull, or for every ram, or for every lamb, or kid of the 

12 goats. According to the number which you offer, thus you 

13 shall do for every one, according to their number. Every one 
born in the land shall prepare these things in this manner, when 
he maketh offerings of homage for a smell of fragrance for the 

14 Lord. And if there be a proselyte among you in your land, or 

vol. I. I i 



!-!-! XV. NUMBERS. 

whoever there may be among your generations, who will make 
an offering of homage, a smell of fragrance for the Lord, in 
the same manner as you do, so shall he do. The congregation 
is the Lord's. 
] 5 There shall be one law for you, and for the proselytes among 

yon is a perpetual law for your generations. As you are, so shall 

16 the proselyte be before the Lord. There shall be one law, and 
one rule of rectitude for you and for the proselyte settled 
among you. 

17 Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the chil- 

18 dren of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, When you come 
to the land to which I am conducting you, this must be done. 

19 When you are about to eat of the bread of the land, you shall 

20 set apart a separate portion as a dedication to the Lord. As 
the first fruits of your dough you shalt set apart a loaf for this 

21 separate portion. As a dedication from the threshing floor, so 
shall you set this apart, as the first portion of your dough, and 
you shall give it to the Lord as a dedication throughout your 

22 generations. xVnd when you shall be guilty of a failure, and 
shall not have performed all these commands which the Lord 

23 hath delivered to Moses— even all that the Lord hath enjoined 
on you by the ministry of Moses, from the day the Lord gave 
them in charge to you, and thenceforward throughout your 

24 generations, then shall this be done. If, escaping the notice of 
the congregation, it hath been done inadvertently, the whole 
congregation shall offer a young bull from the herd, without 
blemish, for a whole burnt offering, for a smell of fragrance 
for the Lord, with its sacrifice, and its libation, according to 
the rule prescribed, and one kid of the goats for a sin offering. 

25 And the priest shall make atonement for the whole congrega- 
tion of the children of Israel, and it shall be forgiven them. 
Because it was done through inadvertency, and they have 
brought their gift, an offering of homage to the Lord for their 

26 sin before the Lord, for their involuntary acts ; therefore for- 
giveness shall be extended to the whole congregation of the 
children of Israel, even to the stranger settled among you; 

27 because it was an act of ignorance in the whole people. And 
if any individual sin ignorantly, he shall bring a she- goat of 

28 the first year for a sin offering ; and the priest shall make an 



Oh. XVI. NUMBERS. 

atonement for the person who hath been guilty through igno- 

29 ranee, and hath sinned inadvertently before the Lord. In mak- 
ing atonement for him who shall act inadvertently, there shall 
be the same law for the stranger among the children of Israel, 
and for the proselyte who hath joined them and sinned inad- 

30 vertently, as for them. But if any person, whether a native or 
a proselyte, shall presumptuously transgress, he provoketh 

31 God ; that person shall be cut off from among his people. Be- 
cause he hath despised the statute of the Lord, and hath bro- 
ken his commandments, that person shall be blotted out : his 
sin shall be upon him. 

32 When the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they 

33 found a man gathering wood on the sabbath day. And they 
who found him gathering wood on the sabbath day, brought 
him before Moses and Aaron, and the whole congregation of 

34 the children of Israel ; and they committed him to custody, 
for it had not been determined what should be done to him. 

35 Whereupon the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Let the man 
be put to death. Let all the congregation stone him with stones. 

36 So all the congregation led him out of the camp, and the 
whole congregation stoned him with stones without the camp, 
as the Lord commanded Moses. 

37 Again the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the chil- 

38 dren of Israel, and thou shalt say to them. Let them make 
for themselves tufts on the corners of their mantles, through- 
out all their generations ; and on the tufts at the corners you 
shall put a blue ribbon, and have it on the tufts, that when 

39 you see them you may remember all the commands of the 
Lord, and do them, and not turn aside after your imaginations, 
and your own eyes, by following of which you have gone a 

¦10 whoring — that you may remember, and do all my commands, 
41 and be dedicated to your God. I am the Lord your God, who 

brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. I the 

Lord am your God. 
XYI. When Kore son of Issaar, son of Kaath, son of Levi, 

spoke, backed by Dathan and Abiron, the son of Eliab, and 
2 by Ami, son of Phaleth, son of Beuben, — when they rose up 

against Moses, with two hundred and hfty men of the sons of 

Israel, leaders of the congregation, eminent for counsel and 



!-!-! XVI. NUMBERS. 

3 men of renown — when they rose in a body against Moses and 
Aaron, and said, Be it known to yon that the whole congre- 
gation are holy, and the Lord is among them. Why then do 

4 you set yourselves against the congregation of the Lord ? Mo- 
ses, upon hearing this, fell on his face, and spoke to Kore, 

5 and to all his company, saying, God hath seen and known 
who are his, and who are holy, and hath brought them near 

6 to himself. Even those whom he chose he hath brought near to 

7 himself. Do this. Take for yourself censers, thou Kore, and 
all you his company; and put fire therein, and lay incense 

8 thereon before the Lord to-morrow. And let the man whom 
the Lord hath chosen be the holy man. Let this suffice you, 
ye sons of Levi. Moreover, Moses said to Kore, Hearken to 

9 me, ye sons of Levi ; Is this a small thing to you, that the God 
of Israel hath separated you from among the congregation of 
Israel, and brought you near to himself, to perform the holy 
services of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to attend before 

10 the tabernacle to perform them ? He hath indeed brought thee 
near, and all thy brethren the children of Levi with thee. And do 

11 you seek in this manner to officiate also as priests — Thou and 
all this thy company who are tumultuously assembled before 
God ? As for Aaron, who is he that you murmur against him ? 

1 2 Then Moses sent for Dathan and Abiron, the sons of Eliab ; 

13 but they said we will not go up. Is it a small matter that thou 
hast been bringing us up to a land flowing with milk and ho- 
ney, to kill us in this wilderness, that thou tyrannisest over us ? 

14 Thou art a chief! And thou hast brought us to a land flow- 
ing with milk and honey ! and hast given us a portion of land, 

15 and vineyards ! Fain wouldst thou put out the eyes of these 
men ! We will not go up. Upon this Moses was greatly in- 
censed, and said to the Lord, Eespect not their sacrifice. I 
have not taken from any of them an object of desire, nor have 

16 I injured any of them. Then Moses said to Kore, Hallow thy 
company and be ready before the Lord, thou and Aaron and 

17 they, to-morrow. And take every one his censer, and put in- 
cense thereon, and present before the Lord, every one, his cen- 
ser, two hundred and fifty censers ; thou also and Aaron, each 

18 his censer. And when every one had taken his censer, and put 
fire therein, and laid incense on it, and Moses and Aaron stood 



!-!-! XVI. NUMBERS. 

19 at the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony ; and Kore had 
collected against them all his company, at the doors of the ta- 
bernacle of the testimony, the glory of the Lord appeared to 

20 the whole congregation. And the Lord spoke to Moses and 

21 Aaron saying, Separate yourselves from among this congre- 

22 gation, and I will consume them all at once. At this they fell 
on their faces and said, God, the God of the spirits even 
of all flesh ! If one man hath sinned, is the wrath of the Lord 

23 against the whole congregation ? Then the Lord spoke to Mo- 
ses, saying, Speak to the congregation, and say, Withdraw all 

24 around from the congregation of Kore. Accordingly Moses, 

25 arose, and went to Dathan and Abiron ; and all the elders of 

26 Israel accompanied him. And he spoke to the congregation, 
saying, Separate yourselves from the tents of these wicked 
men, and touch not any of the things which belong to them, 

27 lest you be consumed with them in their sins. And when they 
had drawn back, all around, from the tent of Kore, Dathan 
and Abiron came out, and stood at the doors of their tents, 

28 with their wives and their children, and their attendants. And 
Moses said, By this you shall know that the Lord hath sent 

29 me to do all these works, and that they are not of myself. — If 
these men die the common death of all men ; or if their vi- 
sitation be according to the visitation of all men, the Lord 

30 hath not sent me : but if the Lord demonstrate by a miracle, 
and the earth opening its mouth, shall swallow up them and 
their households, and their tents, and all that belong to them ; 
and they go down alive to the mansion of the dead ; then you 

31 will know that these men have provoked the Lord. And when 
he had made an end of speaking all these words, the earth was 

32 rent under them ; and the earth opened ; and it swallowed up 
them, and their households, and all the men who were with 

33 Kore, and all their cattle. And they, and all that belonged to 
them, went down alive to the mansions of the dead, and the 

34 earth covered them. And they were destroyed from among 
the congregation. And all the Israelites who were around them 
fled at their cry ; for they said, Perhaps the earth may swallow 

35 us up. And there went forth a fire from the Lord, and con- 
sumed the two hundred and fifty men, who were offering in- 
cense ! 



!-!-! XVII. NUMBERS. 

36 Then the Lord said to Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, 
the son of Aaron, Gather up the brasen censers from among 

37 them who were burned ; but as for the strange fire, scatter it 

38 there Because they have hallowed the censers of these sinful 
men with their lives, therefore make them up into thin plates, 
as a cover for the altar. Because they were presented before 
the Lord, therefore they are hallowed, and made a sign for the 

39 children of Israel. So Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, 
took the brasen censers which they who were burned up had 

40 presented ; and of them made a cover for the altar, a memorial 
to the children of Israel, that none of another family, who is not 
of the seed of Aaron, should come near to present incense be- 
fore the Lord, lest he be like Kore, and his confederacy, as the 
Lord spoke to him by the ministry of Moses. 

41 On the next day, when the people murmured against Mo- 

42 ses and Aaron, saying, You have slain the people of the Lord — 
when, in their insurrection against Moses and Aaron, the con- 
gregation were rushing upon the tabernacle of the testimony, 

43 the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared : And 
Moses went in, with Aaron, in front of the tabernacle of the 

44 testimony, and the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 

45 Withdraw from among this congregation, and I will destroy 

46 them all at once. Whereupon they fell on their face. And Mo- 
ses said to Aaron, Take the censer, and put therein fire from 
the altar, and throw incense on it, and carry it with all haste to 
the camp, and make atonement for them ; for wrath is gone 
forth from the presence of the Lord, and hath begun to slay 

47 the people. So Aaron took as Moses commanded him, and 
ran into the congregation; (Now the destruction among the 
people had already begun) and he threw on the incense, and 

48 made atonement for the people, and stood between the dead 

49 and the living ; and the plague ceased. Now they who died by 
the plague were fourteen thousand seven hundred, besides 
those who died on the account of Kore. 

50 When Aaron returned to Moses to the door of the taber- 
XVII. nacle of the testimony, and the plague had ceased, the 

2 Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the children of Israel, 
and take of them a staff — a staff for every huuse of patriarchal 
families — from all the chiefs of the respective houses of patri- 



!-!-! XVIII. NUMBERS. 

3 archal families twelve staves ; and write every one's name on 
his staff; and on the staff of Levi write Aaron's name; for he 
is one staff. The chief of the house of the head family in every 

1 tribe shall give ; and thou shalt lay them in the tabernacle of 

5 the testimony, over against the testimony. By these I will there 
make myself known to thee ; and it shall come to pass, that the 
staff of the man whom I will chuse, shall bloom : and I will re- 
move from me this murmuring of the children of Israel, which 

6 they murmur against you. So Moses spoke to the children of 
Israel, and all the chiefs gave him, every one a staff — for every 
chief a staff, according to the houses of their patriarchal fami- 

7 lies, twelve staves, with Aaron's staff among theirs. And Mo- 
ses laid the staves before the Lord in the tabernacle of the tes- 

8 timony. And on the next day when Moses went in, with Aaron, 
into the tabernacle of the testimony, behold Aaron's staff, for 
the house of Levi, had bloomed, and brought forth a bud, and 

9 had shot forth blossoms, and produced almonds. And Moses 
brought out all the staves from the presence of the Lord, be- 
fore all the children of Israel. And when they saw and had 

10 taken, every one his staff, the Lord said to Moses, Lay up 
Aaron's staff again before the testimonies, to be kept as a sign 
for the children of these rebellious men ; and let their murmur- 

11 ing cease from me that they may not die. So Moses and Aaron 

12 did as the Lord commanded Moses. And when they had done 
so, the sons of Israel spoke to Moses, saying, Behold, we have 
been wasted, we have been destroyed, we have been cut off 

13 suddenly ; every one who toucheth the tabernacle of the Lord 
XVIII. dieth. Must we all die ? whereupon the Lord spoke to 

Aaron, saying, Thou, and thy sons, and the house of thy father, 

2 shall bear the sins of the holy things ; and thou, and thy sons, 
shall bear the sins of your priesthood ; take therefore to thyself 
thy brethren, the tribe of Levi, the community of thy father, and 
let them be joined to thee, and perform holy service for thee. 

3 While thou, and thy sons with thee, are before the tabernacle 
of the testimony, they shall keep guard for thee, and guard the 
tabernacle of the testimony : but let them not approach to the 
holy utensils, nor to the altar, lest they die, and you with them. 

4 They shall be joined with thee, and shall keep guard over the 
tabernacle of the testimony, according to all the holy services 



Oh. XVIII. NUMBERS. 

of the tabernacle, and none of another family shall come to thee. 

.5 And you shall keep the charge of the holy things, and of the 

altar, so that there shall not be wrath among the children of 1s- 

6 rael. I have indeed taken your brethren, the Levites, from 
among the children of Israel, as a gift presented to the Lord to 

7 perform the services of the tabernacle of the testimony ; there- 
fore thou, and thy sons with thee, shall keep your priesthood, 
as far as the altar is concerned, and what is within the veil ; and 
you shall perform these services as a privilege of your priest- 
hood ; and any one of another family who approacheth shall be 
put to death. 

8 Moreover the Lord said to Aaron, Behold I have given 
you the charge of the separated portions taken from all the 
dedications made to me by the children of Israel. To thee I 

9 have given them for a reward ; and to thy sons after thee. Let this 
therefore be your perpetual due from the hallowed dedications 
of the homage offerings — from all their gifts, and from all their 
sacrifices, and from all their trespass offerings, and from all their 
sin offerings. Whatever they give me, a portion of the hallow- 

10 ed things shall be for thee and thy sons. In the holy place of 
the holies you shall eat them. Every male, namely, thou and 

11 thy sons shall eat them. They shall be hallowed to thee. You 
shall have also a portion from the dedications which the Is- 
raelites make by setting apart, and from all the dedications 
made by being laid on hands — These I have given to thee, and 
thy sons, and thy daughters with thee, as an everlasting due. 

12 Every one in thy house, who is clean, may eat these. Every 
dedication of oil, and every dedication of wine, every dedica- 
tion of food of all kinds which they give to the Lord, these I 

13 have given to thee. All the first fruits in their land, which they 
bring for the Lord, shall belong to thee. Every one in thy 

14 house, who is clean, may eat these. Every thing which is de- 

15 voted by the children of Israel shall belong to thee. And every 
firstling of all flesh, which they bring for the Lord, whether of 
man or beast, shall belong to thee : but the first born of man 
shall be redeemed, and thou shalt cause them to redeem the 

16 firstlings of all cattle which are not clean. Now the redemption 
of the former, at a month old, shall be the set price of five she- 
ll kels after the holy shekel, which is twenty oboli : but the first- 



!-!-! XVIII. NUMBERS. 

lings of kine, and the firstlings of sheep, and the firstlings of 
goats, thou shalt not suffer them to redeem. They are hallow- 
ed ; therefore thou shalt pour out their blood before the altar, 
and offer their suet as an offering of homage, for a smell of fra- 

18 grance for the Lord. And the flesh shall be for thee. Like the 
dedicated breast, and like the right shoulder, it shall be thine. 

19 Every dedication of holy things, which the children of Israel 
set apart for the Lord, I have given to thee, and thy sons, and 
thy daughters, as an everlasting due. It is a covenant of salt 
for ever, before the Lord, with thee and thy seed after thee. 

20 Moreover the Lord said to Aaron, Thou shalt have no in- 
heritance in their land, nor shalt thou have a portion among 
them ; for I am thy portion, and thy inheritance, among the 

21 children of Israel. And behold I have given the Levites all the 

22 tenth in Israel, as a portion for their services. Inasmuch as they 
are to perform service at the tabernacle of the testimony, and 
the children of Israel are no more to come to the tabernacle of 

23 the testimony, to bear a sin which incurreth death, but the Le- 
vites themselves are to perform the service of the tabernacle, 
and to bear their sins, this shall be a perpetual due for their ge- 
nerations, and they shall have no inheritance among the chil- 

24 dren of Israel. Because I have given the Levites for their por- 
tion the tithes of the children of Israel, which they set apart 
for the Lord, as a dedication, therefore I have said to them, they 
shall have no lot of inheritance among the Israelites. 

25 Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Thou shalt speak 
to the Levites and say to them ; When you take from the chil- 

26 dren of Israel the tenth which I have given you from them for 

27 a lot of inheritance, you shall set apart from it, as a dedication 
for the Lord, a tenth of the tenth ; and these dedications of 
yours shall be reckoned to you as corn from the threshiDg 

28 floor, and as a dedication from the press. Thus you shall ac- 
quit yourselves of all the dedications of the Lord — of all your 

29 tenths which you receive from the children of Israel. And you 
shall give the dedication set apart from it for the Lord to Aa- 
ron the priest. From all your gifts you shall set apart a dedi- 
cation for the Lord, and from all the lirst fruits, the hallowed 

30 part of it. Moreover thou shalt say unto them, When you set 
apart the first fruits of it, then it shall be reckoned to the Le- 

VOL. i. K k 



!-!-! XIX. NUMBERS. 

vites as produce from the threshing floor, and as produce from 

31 the press. And you may eat it every where, you and your 
households. Because it is your wages for your services which 

32 you perform at the tabernacle of the testimony ; therefore you 
shall not bear sin by reason of it, because you have set apart 
the first fruits of it. But you must not profane the holy things 
of the children of Israel, lest you die. 

XIX. Again the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 

This is the purification of the law in respect to all the things 

2 which the Lord hath enjoined, saying, Speak to the children 
of Israel, and let them bring thee a red heifer, without ble- 
mish, which hath no spot in her, and on which there hath 

3 never been put a yoke. And thou shalt give her to Eleazar the 
priest ; and they shall lead her out of the camp, to a clean 

4 place, and kill her in his presence. And Eleazar shall take 
some of the blood thereof, and shall sprinkle, over against the 
front of the tabernacle of the testimony, some of the blood 

5 thereof seven times. Then they shall burn her in his sight; 

6 and when her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, and dung, 
are burned, the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and 
scarlet yarn, and throw them into the midst of the cinders of 

7 the heifer. Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and wash 
his whole body with water, and, after that, he shall come into 

8 the camp. And the priest shall be unclean until the evening. 
And he who burned her shall wash his clothes, and wash his 

9 body with water, and be unclean until evening. And a man 
who is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay 
them without the camp, in a clean place, and water of sprink- 
ling shall be kept in store for the congregation of Israel. It is 

10 a purification. And he who gathereth up the ashes of the 
heifer, shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even- 

11 ing. And it shall be for the children of Israel, and for the pro- 
selytes who have joined them, an everlasting ordinance, that 
whoever toucheth the dead body of a man shall be unclean 

12 seven days. He shall be purified on the third, and on the se- 
venth day, then he shall be clean : but if he be not purified on 

13 the third, and on the seventh day, he shall not be clean. If any 
person, who hath touched the dead, die, without being puri- 
fied, he hath defiled the tabernacle of the Lord ; that soul shall 



!-!-! XX. NUMBEKS. 

be blotted out from among Israel. Because the water of sprink- 

14 ling bath not been sprinkled on him, he is unclean. His impu- 
rity is still in him. This also is the law, that if any man die in 
a house, every one who goeth into the house, and all the things 

15 in the house, shall be unclean seven days. And every open ves- 

16 sel which hath not a cover fastened on it, is unclean. And 
every one who, in the open field, toucheth one slain, or dead, 

17 or a human bone, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days. 

Now, for one who is unclean, they shall take some of the 

18 burnt ashes of the purification, and pour spring water thereon, 
in a vessel ; and a man who is clean shall take hyssop, and 
dip it in the water, and sprinkle it on the house, and on the 
vessels, and on the persons who may be in the house, and 
on him who hath touched a human bone, or a man who 

19 hath been slain, or one dead, or a grave. The clean person 
shall sprinkle it on the unclean, on the third day, and on the 
seventh day. And on the seventh day he shall purify himself^ 
and shall wash his clothes, and wash himself with water, and 

20 be unclean until evening. And whoever shall be defiled, and 
not purified, that soul shall be cut off from the congregation, be- 
cause he hath defiled the holy things of the Lord. Because the 
water of sprinkling hath not been sprinkled on him, he is un- 

21 clean. And it shall be an everlasting statute for you, that he 
who sprinkleth the water of sprinkling, shall wash his clothes ; 
and he who toucheth the water of sprinkling shall be unclean 

22 until evening : and whatever the unclean person toucheth shall 
be unclean ; and the person who toucheth it shall be unclean 
until evening. 

XX. When the children of Israel, the whole congregation, came 
to the wilderness of Sin, in the first month, the people took up 
their abode at Kades ; and there Mariam died, and there she 

2 was buried. And there being no water for the cougregation, 

3 they assembled tumultuously against Moses and Aaron ; and 
the people reviled Moses, and said, ! that we had died in the 

4 destruction of our brethren before the Lord ! Why have you 
brought the congregation of the Lord into this wilderness, to 

5 kill us and our cattle ? Why is this ? Have you brought us 
out of Egypt, that we might come to this vile place — a place 
where no seed can be sown, where there are no fig trees, nor 



!-!-! XX. NUMBERS. 

6 vines, nor pomegranates, nor even water to drink? Where- 
upon Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the congre- 
gation, to the door of the tabernacle of the testimony, and fell 
on their faces. And the glory of the Lord appeared to them. 

7 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Take thy staff, and as- 

8 semble the congregation, thou, and Aaron thy brother; and 
speak to that rock before them, and it will give its water. And 
you shall bring water for them from that rock, and give drink 

9 to the congregation, and their cattle. So Moses took the staff 

10 which was before the Lord, as the Lord commanded. And Mo- 
ses and Aaron assembled the congregation, at some distance 
over against the rock, and he said to them, Hear me, ye rebels ! 

11 Can we bring water for you out of this rock? Then Moses 
lifted up his hand, and smote the rock twice with the staff, 
and there gushed out much water, so that the congregation, 

12 and their cattle, drank. Then the Lord said to Moses and 
Aaron, Because you have not believed, to sanctify me before 
the children of Israel, therefore you shall not lead this congre- 

13 gation into the land which I have given them. This is the water 
of Strife, because the children of Israel uttered reproaches be- 
fore the Lord, and he was hallowed among them. 

14 Then Moses sent messengers from Kades, to the king of 
Edom, saying, Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest 

15 all the trouble that hath befallen us. Our fathers went down in- 

16 to Egypt, and we have sojourned in Egypt many years. And 
when the Egyptians ill treated us and our fathers, we cried to 
the Lord, and the Lord hearkened to our voice ; and having 
sent a messenger he hath brought us out of Egypt, and we are 

17 now at Kades, a city on the extremity of thy borders. Let us 
pass through thy land. We will not march through the fields, 
nor vineyards, nor drink water out of thy cisterns. We will 
march along the king's high way, and will not turn aside to 
the right, nor to the left, until we have passed thy borders. 

18 But Edom said to him, Thou shalt not pass through me. If 

19 thou attempt it, I will come out to meet thee in battle. Where- 
upon the children of Israel said, Let us pass through along 
the mountains, and if I, or my cattle drink of thy water, I will 
make thee compensation. Grant but this. It is but a small 

20 matter. Let us march through along the mountain. But he 



!-!-! XXI NUMBERS. 

said, Thou shalt not pass through me. And Edom came out 

21 to meet him with a great multitude, and a strong hand. As 
Edom would not grant Israel a passage through his borders, 

22 therefore they turned aside from him ; and having removed 
from Kades, the Israelites— the whole congregation came to 
mount Hor. 

2.1 And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron at mount Hor, 

on the borders of the land of Edom, saying, Let Aaron be 

24 gathered to his people. For you shall not enter the land which 
I have given the children of Israel for a possession, because 

25 you provoked me at the water of strife. Take Aaron thy 
brother, and Eleazar his son, and make them go up to mount 

26 Hor, in the view of the whole congregation, and strip Aaron of 
his robes, and put them on Eleazar his son : and let Aaron be 

27 composed, and die there. So Moses did as the Lord com- 
manded him. — And having taken them up to mount Hor, in 

28 the view of the whole congregation, he stripped Aaron of his 
garments, and put them on Eleazar his son. And Aaron died 
on the top of the mount. And Moses and Eleazar came down 

29 from the mount. And when all the congregation saw that Aaron 
was dead, the whole house of Israel mourned for Aaron thirty 
days. 

XXL When the Chananite, the king of Arad, who dwelt in 

front of the wilderness, heard that Israel was coming by the 

2 way of Atharim, he made war on Israel, and took some of 
them prisoners; whereupon Israel vowed a vow to the Lord, 
and said, If thou wilt deliver this people into my hand, I will 

3 devote them and their cities to destruction. And the Lord 
hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up these Cha- 
nanites into their hands, and they anathematised them and their 
cities, and called the name of that place Anathema. 

4 Xow when they had removed from mount Hor, by the 
way to the Red sea, and were marching round the land of 
Edom, the people became dispirited in the march, and spoke 

5 against God, and against Moses, saying, Why hast thou 
brought us out of Egypt to kill us in this wilderness ; for 
we have neither bread, nor water, and our soul loatheth this 

6 light food. Whereupon the Lord sent the most deadly ser- 

7 pents among the people, and they bit the people. And 



!-!-! XXI. NUMBERS. 

when many of the children of Israel died, the people came to 
Moses and said, We have sinned, because we have spoken 
against the Lord, and against thee ; pray therefore to the Lord? 

8 and let him take away the serpents from us. So Moses prayed 
to the Lord for the people, and the Lord said to Moses, Make 
thee a serpent, and put it on a standard ; and it shall come to 
pass that when a serpent biteth a man, every one who is bit- 

9 ten shall live by looking at that. So Moses made a serpent of 
brass, and put it on a standard, and it came to pass that when 
a serpent bit a man, he looked up to that serpent, and lived. 

10 And the Israelites removed, and encamped at Oboth ; and 

11 having removed from Oboth, they encamped at Achelgai, on 
the borders of the desart, which is in front of Moab, towards 

12 the rising of the sun. And removing from that place, they en- 
camped in the vale of Zared, from which they removed, and 

13 encamped on the banks of Arnon, in the wilderness, on the 
borders of the Amorites ; for Arnon is the boundary of Moab, 

14 between Moab and the Amorites. For this cause it is said in a 
book, 

The war of the Lord burned Zoob and the vales of Arnon, 

15 And made the vales the habitation of Er ; 
And he adjoineth the borders of Moab. 

16 Thence they came to Well; this is the well concerning which 
the Lord said to Moses, Gather the people together, and I will 

17 give them water to drink. Then sung Israel this song to the 
well, 

Begin to him the alternate song of the well. 

18 Chiefs digged it : the kings of nations hewed it out, 
In their reign when they ruled over them. 

19 And from Well they moved on to Manthanaiem; and from 

20 Manthanaeim to Naaliel ; and from Naaliel to Bamoth ; and 
from Bamoth to Nepe, which is in that plain of Moab border- 
ing on the craggy cliff, namely, that which looketh towards the 
wilderness. 

21 Now Moses had sent messengers to Seon, king of the 

22 Amorites, with a message of peace, saying, Let us pass through 
thy land. We will march by the highway ; we will not turn 
aside into the fields, nor into the vineyards ; nor will we drink 
water out of thy;wells. Let us march along the king's highway. 



!-!-! XXI. NUMBERS. 

23 until we pass thy borders. But Seon would not grant Israel 
a passage through his territories. He indeed assembled all his 
people, and went out to the wilderness, to attack Israel, and 

24 came to Jessa, and drew up in array against Israel. Where- 
upon Israel smote him with the slaughter of the sword, and 
took possession of his land, from Anion to Jabok, even to the 

25 Ammanites ; for Jazer is the boundary of the Ammanites. So 
Israel took all those cities ; and Israel dwelt in all the cities of 
the Amorites, in Hesebon, and in all those under the same do- 

26 minion with it ; for Hesebon was the city of Seon the king of 
the Amorites. He indeed had made war on a former king of 
Moab, and had taken all his land from Aroer to Arnon ; for 
this cause the poets say, 

27 Come to Hesebon that it may be rebuilded, 
And that the city of Seon may be inhabited. 

28 For a fire went forth from Hesebon — 
And a flame from the city of Seon ; 
Which devoured even to Moab — 
Which devoured the pillars of Arnon. 

29 Alas ! for thee Moab ! 

Thou wast undone, people of Chamos ! 
Their sons were delivered up to save their lives ; 
And their daughters were captives to Seon, king of the 
Amorites, 

30 And their seed was destroyed from Hesebon even to 

Daibon. 
And against Moab their wives rekindled a fire. 

31 And when Israel had taken possession of all the cities of the 

32 Amorites : Moses sent to view Jazer, and they took it, and all 

33 the villages thereof, and drove out the Amorites who were 
there. Then they turned and went up by the way of Basan. 
And when Og king of Basan came out to meet them, he and 
all his people, for battle at Adrairn, the Lord said to Moses, 

34 Be not afraid of him ; for into thy hands I will deliver him, and 
all his people, and all his land ; And thou shalt do to him, as 
thou hast done to Seon, the king of the Amorites, who dwelt 

35 at Hesebon. So he smote him, and his sons,, and all his people, 
until there was not one left to be taken alive. And they took 
possession of their land. 



!-!-! XXiL NUMBERS. 

XXII. When the Israelites had removed, and pitched their 
tents on the west of Moab, along the Jordan, over against Je- 

2 richo ; and Balak, son of Sepphor, had seen all that Israel had 

3 done to the Arnorites, though Moab was exceedingly afraid 
of the people because they were numerous, yet Moab was in- 
censed at the sight of the Israelites, and said to the Senate of 

4 Madiam, Now will this congregation lick up all around us, as 

5 the ox licketh up the grass of the field. Now Balak, son of 
Sepphor, was at that time king of Moab, he therefore had sent 
messengers to Balaam, son of Beor, at Pathoura, which is by 
the river of the land of the children of his people, to invite him 
to come to him, saying, Behold there is a people come out of 
Egypt ; and lo ! they have covered the face of this land, and are 

6 settled down near me. Now therefore come, curse for me this 
people ; for they are stronger than I. Perhaps I may be able to 
smite some of them, and drive them out of this land : for I know 
that they whom thou blessest are blessed, audi they whom thou 

7 cursest are cursed. So the ambassadors of Moab, and the am- 
bassadors of Madiam, went with the rewards of divination in their 

8 hands, and when they came to Balaam, and rehearsed to him the 
words of Balak, he said to them, Tarry here this night, and I will 

9 give you an answer according to what the Lord shall say to me. 
So the chiefs of Moab tarried with Balaam. And God came to Ba- 
ll) laam, and said to him, What would these men with thee ? And 

Balaam said to God, Balak son of Sepphor, king of Moab, hath 

11 sent them to me, sayiug, Behold there is a people come out of 
Egypt, who have covered the face of this land, and they are 
settled down near me ; now therefore come and curse them for 
me ; perhaps I may be able to smite them, and drive them out 

12 of this land. Thereupon God said to Balaam, Thou shalt not 

13 go with them, nor curse that people, for they are blessed. So 
when Balaam arose in the morning, he said to the chiefs of Ba- 
lak, Return speedily to your Lord, for God doth not permit 

14 me to go with you. And the chiefs of Moab arose, and went 
to Balak, and said to him, Balaam refuseth to come with us. 

15 Then Balak sent again other princes, more in number, and of 

16 greater dignity than them, and they went to Balaam and said to 
him, Thus saith Balak, the son of Sepphor, I entreat thee delay 

17 not to come to me, for I will promote thee to great honour, 



!-!-! XXII. NUMBERS. 

and do for thee whatever thou sayest ; therefore come, curse 

18 this people for me. In reply to which Balaam said to the prin- 
ces of Balak, If Balak would give me his house full of silver 
and gold, I cannot transgress the word of the Lord God, to do 

19 any thing, small or great, of my own mere will. Now therefore 
tarry you also here this night, that I may know what the Lord 

20 will further say to me. And God came to Balaam by night, 
and said to him, If these men come to call thee, arise and go 

21 with them : but what I say to thee, that thou shalt do. Where- 
upon Balaam arose in the morning, and saddled his ass, and 

22 went with the princes of Moab. Aad God was angry, because 
he went of himself to him ; and the angel of God arose to stop 
him on the way. Now he was mounted on his ass, and had two 

23 servants with him. And when the ass saw the angel of God 
standing opposite, in the way, with a drawn sword in his hand, 
the ass turned aside out of the way into the field ; at which he 

24 struck the ass with his staff, to turn her into the road. Then 
the angel of God took a station between the rows of the vines, 

25 there being a hedge on this side, and a hedge on that. And 
when the ass saw the angel of God, she threw herself against 
the wall, and bruised Balaam's foot against the wall. Where- 

26 upon he struck her again. Then the angel of God again retir- 
ed, and stood in a narrow place, where there was no turning, 

27 to the right, or to the left. And when the ass saw the angel of 
God, she lay down under Balaam ; at which Balaam was in- 

> flamed with wrath, and gave the ass a severe blow with the 

28 staff. Thereupon God opened the mouth of the ass, and she 
said to Balaam, What have I done to thee that thou hast cor- 

29 rectecl me this third time ? And Balaam said to the ass, because 
thou hast mocked me, and had I a sword in my hand I should 

30 now have run it through thee. And the ass said to Balaam, 
Am I not the ass on which thou hast ridden from thy youth 
even to this day ? Did I ever through stubbornness, do such a 

31 thing as this to thee. And he said, No. Then God opened the 
eyes of Balaam ; and when he saw the angel of the Lord stand- 
ing opposite, in the way, with a drawn sword in his hand, he 

32 bowed down, and fell flat on his face. And the angel of God 
said to him, Why didst thou strike thy ass three times? Be- 
hold I came out to stop thee, because thy journey is not seemly 

VOL. I. L 1 



!-!-! XXIII. NUMBERS. 

33 in ray sight, and the ass, seeing me, turned aside from me these 
three times. And had she not turned aside from me I should 
now have killed thee ; but I would have preserved her alive. 

34 Then Balaam said to the angel of the Lord, I have sinned in- 
advertently ; for I did not know that thou stoodest in the way 
against me. Now therefore, if it is not agreeable to thee, I will 

35 turn back. And the angel of God said to Balaam, Go with 
these men ; but whatever word I speak to thee be careful to 

36 deliver that. So Balaam went with the princes of Balak. And 
when Balak heard that Balaam was coming, he went out to 
meet him, to a city of Moab, which is on Arnon, which is a 

37 part of the boundary. And Balak said to Balaam, Did I not 
send for thee ? Why then didst thou not come to me ? Am not 

38 I able to promote thee to honour ? And Balaam said to Balak, 
Behold now I am come to thee, shall I be able to say any thing ? 
Whatever word God shall put in my mouth, that I will speak. 

39 So Balaam went with Balak, and when they came to the cities 

40 of Sheepcots, Balak sacrificed sheep, and young bulls, and 

41 sent them to Balaam, and the princes with him. And early next 
morning Balak took Balaam, and led him up to the top of the 
pillar of Baal, and from it shewed him some part of the peo- 

XXIII. pie. Whereupon Balaam said to Balak, Build for me 
here seven altars, and prepare for me here seven young bulls, 

2 and seven rams. And when Balak had done as Balaam had 
ordered him ; and had offered a bull, and a ram, on each altar, 
then Balaam said to Balak, Stand by thy sacrifice, and I will 

3 advance on. If God appear to me by any occurrence, whatever 
he shall shew me I will tell thee. So Balak stood by his sacri- 

4 fice. And Balaam went to inquire of God : and as he was going 
straight forward, God appeared to Balaam : And Balaam said 
to him, I have prepared seven altars, and offered a young bull, 

5 and a ram, on each altar. And God put a word in the mouth 
of Balaam, and said, Return to Balak, and thus thou shalt say. 

6 So he returned to Balak. Now he was standing by his whole 

7 burnt offerings, and all the princes of Moab with him ; And a 
spirit of God came upon Balaam, and he took up his parable, 
and said, 

I am called from Mesopotamia by Balak — 

By the king of Moab from the mountains of the east, 



!-!-! XXIIT. NUMBERS. 

Come, saitli be, Curse Jacob for me, 
And, come, for me devote Israel. 

8 How can I curse hiin, whom the Lord doth nut curse ? 
Or how devote him whom God devoteth not ? 

9 For from the top of mountains I can see him ; 
Even from hills I can observe him, 

Behold he shall dwell, as a people by themselves, 
And shall not be reckoned among the nations. 

10 Who hath accurately scanned the seed of Jacob? 
Who can count the communities of Israel ? 

May my soul depart among the souls of the righteous ! 
And my offspring be as the seed of these ! 

11 At this Balak said to Balaam, What hast thou done to me ? 

12 I sent for thee to curse my enemies, and behold thou hast pro- 
nounced a blessing. And Balaam said to Balak, Must I not 

13 be careful to speak what God hath put in my mouth ? Then 
Balak said to him, Come with me to yet another place, from 
which thou shalt not have a full view of them. Thou shalt see 
only a part of them, and not view them all ; and curse them for 

14 me from that place. So he took him to a watch tower of the field 
on the top of a craggy cliff, and built there seven altars. xVnd 

15 when he had offered a bull, and a ram, on each altar, Balaam said 
to Balak, Stand by thy sacrifice, and I will advance on, to in- 

16 quire of God. And God met Balaam and put a word in his 
mouth, and said, Keturn to Balak, and thus thou shalt speak. 

17 So he returned to him. Now he was standing by his whole 
burnt offering, and all the princes of Moab with him. And 
Balak said to him, What hath the Lord spoken ? Whereupon 
he took up his parable, and said, 

18 Stand up Balak and bear ; 

Listen attentively as a witness, thou son of Sepphor ! 

19 God is not like a man to be deceived ; 
Nor like a son of man to be threatened. 
When he hath spoken, will he not perform ? 
When he shall speak, will he not stand to it ? 

20 Behold I am constrained to bless ! 
Bless I will. Indeed I cannot avoid it. 

21 There shall be no calamity in Jacob ; 
Nor shall misery be seen in Israel. 



!-!-! XXIV. NUMBERS. 

The Lord their God is with them ; 
The glories of princes are among them. 

22 The God who hath brought them out of Egypt, 
Is to them like the glory of a unicorn. 

23 For there is no augury used by Jacob — 
Nor divination among Israel. 

In due season it shall be told by Jacob, 
And to Israel, what God will execute. 

24 Behold the people will rouse like a young lion ; 
And, like an old lion, exult with pride. 

They will not go to rest till they devour prey — 
Until they have drunk the blood of the slain. 

25 Upon this Balak said to Balaam, Thou shalt neither with 
curses, curse them for me; nor shalt thou with blessings bless 

26 them. In reply to which Balaam said to Balak, Did I not tell 

27 thee saying, Whatever God shall speak, that I must do. Then 
Balak said to Balaam, Come let me take thee to another place, 
that, if it please God, thou mayst curse them for me from it. 

28 So Balak took Balaam to the top of Phogor, which extendeth 

29 into the wilderness. And Balaam said to Balak, Build me here 
seven altars, and prepare for me here seven young bulls, and 

30 seven rams. And when Balak had done as Balaam ordered 
XXIV. him, and had offered a bull, and a ram, on every altar, 

Balaam, seeing that it was good in the sight of the Lord to 
bless Israel, did not go, as was customary with him, to look 

2 for omens ; but turned his face towards the wilderness. And 
when Balaam raised his eyes, and saw Israel encamped by 
tribes, a spirit of God came upon him, and he took up his para- 
ble, and said, 

3 Balaam son of Beor saith — 

The man who seeth according to truth saith — 

4 It is the saying of him, who hath heard the oracles of the 

Almighty — 
Who in sleep hath seen a vision of God — whose eyes were 
opened. 

5 How beautiful are thy houses, Jacob ! Thy tents, Israel ! 

6 Like shady forests, and like gardens by a river ! 
And like tents which the Lord hath pitched ! 
And like cedars by streams of water. 



!-!-! XXIY. NUMBERS. 

7 There shall come forth a man from his seed, 
And he shall rule over many nations : 

And a kingdom greater than Gog's shall be raised up ; 
And his kingdom shall be enlarged 

8 God hath led him out of Egypt, 

His glory is like that of the unicorn ; 
He will eat up the nations of his enemies ; 
And he will exhaust their fatness, 
And pierce his enemy with his darts. 

9 Couching down, he is gone to rest, like a lion — 
Yes like a young lion ; who dare rouse him ? 
Blessed are they who bless thee, 

And they who curse thee are already cursed. 

10 At this Balak was inflamed with wrath against Balaam, and 
clapped his hands. And Balak said to Balaam, I sent for thee 
to curse my enemy, and behold thou hast blessed them a third 

11 time. Now therefore flee to thy own place. I thought to promote 
thee to honour. But the Lord hath now deprived thee of that 

12 glory. Whereupon Balaam said to Balak, Did I not tell thy mes- 

13 sengers whom thou sentest to me, If Balak would give me his 
house full of silver and gold, I cannot transgress the word of the 
Lord, to do either good or evil, of my own mere will. Whatever 

14 God may order that I will speak. And now, behold, I am 
quickly to return to my own place : come, let me inform thee 

15 what this people will do to thy people, in the latter days. Then 
taking up his parable, he said, 

Balaam son of Beor saith — 

It is the saying of a man who is a true seer, 

16 Who heareth the oracles of God, 

And hath knowledge from the Most High — 
Who in sleep hath seen a vision of God, and whose eyes 
were opened. 

17 I can point to him, though he is not now ; 
I hail him happy tho' he is not near. 

A star will arise out of Jacob — 
There shall rise up a man out of Israel, 
And he will smite the princes of Moab, 
And plunder all the sons of Seth : 

18 And Edom shall be an inheritance, 



!-!-! XXY. NUMBERS. 

And Esau, his enemy, shall be a heritage. 
Though Israel hath done valiantly ; 

19 Yet one shall be raised up out of Jacob, 

Who will destroy him who escaped from a city. 

20 Then having taken a view of Amalek he took up his parable 
and said, 

Amalek is the head of nations ; 
But their seed shall be destroyed. 

21 Then having taken a view of the Kenite, he took up his para- 
ble and said, 

Strong is thy dwelling place. 

But though thou hast built thy nest upon a rock — 

22 And though Beor hath crafty chickens ; 
The Assyrians will captivate thee. 

23 Then looking at Og he took up his parable and said, 

Oh ! Who can live when God will order such things ! 

24 For bands of Kitians will issue forth, 
And afflict Assur, and afflict Hebrews : 

And they themselves shall likewise be destroyed. 
2.3 Then Balaam arose, and went away, with a view to return to 

his own place, and Balak repaired home. 
XXY. While Israel abode at Sattin, the people profaned theni- 

2 selves to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab, who 
invited them to the sacrifices of their idols ; and the people ate 
of their sacrifices, and worshipped their idols, and Israel con- 

3 secrated himself to Belphegor. Whereupon the wrath of the 
Lord was kindled against Israel ; and the Lord said to Moses, 

4 Take all those leaders of the people and make a public ex- 
ample of them, for the Lord, in the face of the sun ; so shall 

5 the wrath of the Lord be turned away from Israel. Then Mo- 
ses said to the tribes of Israel, Kill ye, every one, him of his 

6 family, who hath consecrated himself to Belphegor. And be- 
hold there came a man of the children of Israel, who conduct- 
ed his brother to a Madianitish woman in the sight of Moses, 
and before all the congregation of the sons of Israel, while 
they were weeping at the door of the tabernacle of the testi- 

7 mony. Upon seeing this, Phineas, son of Eleazar, son of 
Aaron the priest, started up from among the congregation, and 

8 taking a javelin in his hand, went after the man — the Israelite, 



!-!-! XXVI. NUMBERS. 

into the bed chamber, and ran them both through, the man, the 
9 Israelite, quite through, and the woman into her belly. Where- 
upon the plague stopped from the children of Israel. Now they 

10 who had died of the plague were twenty four thousand. And 

11 the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Phineas, son of Eleazar, son 
of Aaron the priest, hath stayed my wrath from Israel, by shew- 
ing a zeal for me among them, so that in my jealousy I have 
not utterly consumed the children of Israel. Therefore say, 

12 Behold I give him the covenant of peace. It shall be to him, 

13 and to his seed after him, an everlasting covenant of the 
priests' office, because he shewed a zeal for his God, and made 

14 atonement for the children of Israel. Now the name of the 
man — the Israelite, who was slain with the Madianitish wo- 
man, was Zambri, son of Salmon, the chief of the patriarchal 

15 house of of the Symeonites ; and the name of the Madianitish 
woman, who was slain, was Chasbi, a daughter of Sour, the 
chief of the clan of Ommath, which is the head family of Ma- 
diam. 

lb' Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 
17 children of Israel, and say, Treat as enemies the Madianites, 
and smite them, for they are acting as enemies against you, 
with craftiness, in all their attempts to beguile you by means 
of Phogor, and by means of Chasbi, the daughter of a prince 
of Madiam, their sister, who was slain on the day of the 
plague, on account of Phogor. 
XXVI. And, after the plague, the Lord spoke to Moses, and 

2 Eleazar the priest, saying, Take the sum of the whole congre- 
gation of Israel, from twenty years old and upwards, according 
to the houses of their families, every one who goeth out to war 

3 in Israel. Upon which, orders were issued by Moses, and 
Eleazar the priest, at Araboth-Moab, on the Jordan over 

4 against Jericho, saying, From twenty years old and iirpwards, 
as the Lord commanded Moses. 

Now these were the sons of Israel who came out of Egypt. 

5 Reuben, Israel's first born. xVnd the sons of Reuben, 
Enoch, and the community of the Enochites; to Phallus be- 

6 longed the community of the Phalluites ; to Asron, the com- 
munity of the Asronites ; to Charmi, the community of the 

7 Charmites — These are the communities of Reuben, and the 



!-!-! XXVI. NTJMBEBS. 

muster of them was forty three thousand seven hundred and 

8 thirty. Xow of the Phalluites, Eliab was chief, and the sons of 

9 Eliab were Xamuel ; and Dathan, and Abiron. These were 
the head families of the congregation. These were they who 
conspired against Moses and Aaron, in the company of Kore, 

10 in the insurrection against the Lord. And the earth, opening 
its mouth, swallowed them up with Kore, at the time when his 
company died — when the fire consumed the two hundred and 

11 fifty, and they were made a sign; but the children of Kore 
died not. 

12 And the children of Symeon were, the community of the 
Symeonites ; from Namuel, the community of the Namuelites ; 

13 from Jamin, the community of the Jaminites ; from Jachin, 
the community of the Jachinites ; from Zara, the community 
of the Zaraites; from Saul, the community of the Saulites. 

14 These communities of Symeon, from the muster of them, were 
twenty two thousand two hundred. 

19 And the sons of Judas were Er and Aunan, but Er and 

20 Aunan died in the land of Chanaan, so that these were the chil- 
dren of Judas, according to their communities — from Selom, 

21 the community of the Selomites; from Phares, the communi- 
ty of the Pharesites ; from Zara, the community of the Zara- 
ites. And the Pharesites were — from Asron, the community 

22 of the Asronites; from Jamun, the community of the Janiu- 
nites. These communities of Judas, according to the review 
of them, were seventy six thousand five hundred. 

23 And the children of Issachar were, according to their com- 
munities — from Thola, the community of the Tholaites ; from 
Phua, the community of the Phuaites; from Jasub, the com- 

24 munity of the Jasubites ; from Samram, the community of the 

25 Samramites. These communities of Issachar, from the review 
of them, were sixty four thousand four hundred. 

26 The children of Zabulon were, according to their commu- 
nities — from Sared, the community of the Saredites ; from 
Allon, the community of the Allonites; from Allel, the com- 

27 munity of the Allelites. These communities of Zabulon, from 
the review of them, were sixty thousand five hundred. 

15 The children of Gad, by their communities, were — from 
Saphon, the community of the Saphonites ; from Aggi, the 



Oli. XXVI. NUMBERS. 

16 community of the Aggites ; from Suni, the community of the 
Sunites ; from Azeni, the community of the Azenites ; from 

17 Addi, the community of the Addites ; from Aroadi, the com- 
munity of the Aroadites ; from Ariel, the community of the 

18 Arielites ; these communities of the children of Gad, from the 
review of them, were forty thousand five hundred. 

44 The children of Aser, by their communities, were — from 
Jamin, the community of the Jaminites ; from Jesu, the com- 
munity of the Jesuites ; from Baria, the community of the 

45 Bariaites ; from Chober, the community of the Choberites ; 

46 from Melchiel, the community of the Melchielites ; now the 

47 name of Aser's daughter was Sara : these communities of 
Aser were from the review of them, fifty three thousand four 
hundred. 

28 The children of Joseph by their communities were — Ma- 

29 nasses and Ephraim. The children of Manasses were from 
Machir, the community of the Machirites. Galaad also being 
a son of Machir, from Galaad, the community of the Galaad - 

30 ites. And these also were Galaadites, from Achiezer, the 
community of the Achiezer ites ; from Cheleg, the community 

31 of the Chelegites; from Esriel, the community of the Esriel- 

32 ites ; from Sychem, the community of the Sychemites ; from 
Symaer, the community of the Symaerites ; and from Opher, 

33 the community of the Opherites. Now Salpaad the son of 
Opher had no sons ; but he had daughters, and these were the 
names of Salpaad's daughters, Maala and Nua, and Egla, and 

34 Melcha, and Thersa. These communities of Manasses were, 
from the review of them, fifty two thousand seven hundred. 

35 And these were the children of Ephraim, from Suthala, the 
community of the Suthalites ; from Tanach, the community 

36 of the Tanachites ; these also were Suthalites— from Eden, the 

37 community of the Edenites ; these communities of Ephraim 
were from the review of them, thirty two thousand five hun- 
dred. These were the communities of Joseph, by their com- 
munities. 

38 The children of Benjamin, according to their communities 
were— of Bale, the community of the Balites; of Asuber, 

39 the community of the Asuberites ; of Jachiran, the communi- 
ty of the Jachiranites ; of Sophan, the community of the So- 

vol. i. Mm 



Oh. XXVI. NUMBERS. 

40 phanites ; now Adar and Noeman being sons of Bale — of 
Adar, was the community of the Adar it es ; and of Noeman, 

41 the community of the Noeraanites. These Benjaminites, ac- 
cording to their communities were, from the review of them, 
forty five thousand five hundred. 

42 And the children of Dan, according to their communities, 
were of Same, the community of the Saineites. These were the 

43 communities of Dan, according to their communities. xAll the 
communities of the Sameites were, according to the review of 
them, sixty four thousand four hundred. 

48 The children of Nephthaleim, by their communities, were — 
of Asiel, the community of the Asielites ; of Gauni, the coin- 

49 munity of the Gaunites ; of Jeser, the community of the Je- 

50 serites ; of Sellem, the community of the Sellemites. These 
communities of Nephthaleim were from the review of them, 
forty five thousand four hundred. 

51 This muster of the Israelites was six hundred and one thou- 
sand and seven hundred and thirty. 

52 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Among these let 

53 the land be divided, that they may inherit it, by the number of 

54 names. To those who are many, thou shalt enlarge the inhe- 
ritance ; and to them who are few, thou shalt give the less in- 
heritance. To every one, as they have been reviewed, their in- 
heritance shall be given. Among these names the land shall 

55 be parcelled out, by lot. They shall inherit according to the 

56 tribes of their patriarchal families. By lot thou shalt parcel out 
their inheritance, to the many and the few. 

57 Now these were the children of Levi, according to their 
communities — of Gerson, the community of the Gersonites ; 
of Kaath, the community of the Kaathites ; of Merari, the com- 

58 munity of the Merarites. These are also communities of the 
children of Levi — the community of the Lobenites, the com- 
munity of the Chebronites, the community of the Korites, the 

59 community of the Musites. And Kaath begot Ambram, whose 
wife's name was Jochabed, a daughter of Levi and she bore 
these for Levi in Egypt — She bore by Ambram, Aaron, and 

60 Moses, and Mariam their sister. And to Aaron were born Na- 

61 dab and Abiud, and Eleazar and Ithamar. But Nadab and 
Abiud died when they presented strange fire before the Lord, 



!-!-! XXVII. NUMBERS. 

62 in the wilderness of Sina. From the review of them, they were 
twenty three thousand, including every male, from a month old 
and upwards ; for they were not reviewed among the children 
of Israel ; because there was no portion given them among the 

63 children of Israel. Now this was the review of Moses and Ele- 
azar the priest, who reviewed the Israelites at Arabeth-Moab, 

64 on the Jordan, over against Jericho ; and among them there was 
not a man of those who had been reviewed by Moses and Aaron, 
when they reviewed the Israelites in the wilderness of Sina. 

65 Because the Lord said to them, they shall assuredly die in the 
wilderness ; therefore there was not one of them left, save Cha- 
leb son of Jephonne, and Joshua son of Nave. 

XXVII. Then came the daughters of Salpaad, son of Opher, 
son of Galaad, son of Machir, of the community of Manasses, 

2 one of the sons of Joseph (now these were their names ; Maala, 
and Nua, and Egla, and Melcha, and Thersa) and standing be- 
fore Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the 
chiefs, and before the whole congregation, at the door of the 

3 tabernacle of the testimony, they said, Our father died in the 
wilderness, but he was not among the congregation which con- 
spired against the Lord, in the assembly of Kore. Because he 

4 died for his own sin, and had no sons, let not the name of our 
father be blotted out from among his community. Seeing he 
hath not a son, give us a possession among our father's bre- 

5 thren. Whereupon Moses laid their case before the Lord. 

6 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, The daughters of Sal- 

7 paad have spoken right. Thou shalt give them the possession 
of an inheritance among their father's brothers, and vest in them 

8 their father's lot. And thou shalt say to the children of Israel, 
If any man die, and hath no son, you shall vest his inheritance 

9 in his daughter ; and if he hath no daughter, you shall give his 

10 inheritance to his brother ; and if he hath no brothers, you shall 

11 give his inheritance to his father's brother ; and if there be no 
brothers of his father, you shall give the inheritance to one of 
his house, who is the nearest of kin to him, of his tribe, that 
he may inherit what belonged to him. And this shall be to the 
children of Israel a rule of decision, as the Lord commanded 
Moses. 

12 Then the Lord said to Moses, Go up that mountain which 



!-!-! XXVIII. NUMBERS. 

is on the bank of the Jordan — that mount Nabo, and take a 
view of the land of Chanaan, which I give to the children of Is- 

13 rael, by a possessory right. And when thou hast seen it, thou 
shalt be gathered to thy people, as Aaron thy brother was ga- 

14 thered on mount Hor, because you transgressed my command 
in the wilderness of Sin. When the people resisted the hallow- 
ing of me, you did not hallow me at the water before them. 
(This alludeth to the water of strife at Kades in the widerness.) 

15 Upon this Moses said to the Lord, Let the Lord, the God of 

16 the spirits, and of all flesh, look out a man to be set over this 
congregation, who shall go out before them, and come in before 

17 them ; and who shall lead them out, and bring them in ; so that 
the congregation of the Lord may not be like a flock which 

18 hath no shepherd. Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, 
Take as thy associate Joshua, son of Nave, a man who hath a 
spirit in him, and thou shalt lay thy hands on him, and set him 

19 before Eleazar, the priest, and give him a charge before the 
whole congregation, and give a charge before them concerning 

20 him. And thou shalt put some of thy glory on him, that the 

21 children of Israel may hearken to him. And he shall stand be- 
fore Eleazar, the priest, and they shall ask him the determina- 
tion of the manifestations before the Lord. And at his com- 
mand they shall go out ; and at his command he, and all the 
children of Israel with him, even all the congregation, shall 
come in. 

22 So Moses did as the Lord commanded him ; and hav- 
ing taken Joshua, he set him before Eleazar the priest, and 
before all the congregation, and laid his hands on him, and made 
him his associate, as the Lord commanded Moses. 

XXVIII. Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Give a charge 

2 to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, You shall 

observe to bring me my gifts, my oblations, my homage offer - 

o ings for a smell of fragrance at my festivals. Moreover thou 

shalt say to them, These are the homage offerings which you 

shall present to the Lord — two lambs, of the first year, with- 

4 out blemish, every day, for a continual whole burnt offering — 
the one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning, and the other in 

5 the evening ; and for a sacrifice of flour, thou shalt offer the 
tenth of an ephah of fine flour, mixed up with the quarter of 



Oh. XXVI11. NUMBERS. 

6 an hin of oil. It is the continual whole burnt offering, which 
was instituted at mount Sina, for a smell of fragrance for the 

7 Lord : and for the libation thereof, thou shalt offer, with the first 
lamb, a quarter of an hin of wine. In the holy place thou shalt 

8 pour out as a libation the choicest wine to the Lord. And to- 
wards evening thou shalt offer the other lamb, with the like 
sacrifice, and the like libation ; for a smell of fragrance for the 
Lord. 

9 And on the day of the sabbaths, you shall bring two lambs 
of the first year, without blemish, and two tenths of fine flour 
mixed up with oil, for a sacrifice, together with a libation, as 

10 the sabbath whole burnt offering, for every sabbath, over and 
above the continual whole burnt offering with its libation. 

11 And at the new moons you shall offer a whole burnt offer- 
ing to the Lord, two young bulls from the herd, one ram, se- 

12 ven lambs, of the first year, without blemish, three tenths of 
fine flour, mixed up with oil, for each bull, and two tenths of 

13 fine flour, mixed up with oil, for the ram, and a tenth of fine 
flour, mixed up with oil, for every lamb, as a sacrifice for a 

14 smell of fragrance — an homage offering for the Lord : and their 
libation shall be, the half of an hin of wine for each bull ; and 
the third of an hin for the ram ; and the fourth of an hin for 
every lamb. This shall be the whole burnt offering, month af- 

15 ter month, for all the months of the year — Also a kid of the 
goats, for a sin offering. This, with its libation, shall be offered 
to the Lord, over and above the continual whole burnt offer- 
ing. 

16 And in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, 

17 shall be the passover to the Lord, and on the fifteenth day of 
the month shall commence the festival thereof. Seven days you 

18 shall eat unleavened bread. Now, this first day shall be solemn- 
ly ly set apart for you. You shall not do any kind of sacrificial 

service ; but you shall bring for whole burnt offerings — for an 
offering of homage to the Lord, two young bulls from the herd, 
one ram, seven lambs of the first year. You must see that they 

20 are without blemish. And their sacrifice shall be fine flour, 
mixed up with oil, three tenths for each bull, and two tent! is 

21 for the ram, and thuu shalt prepare a tenth for every one of the 

22 seven lambs ; and a kid of the goats for a sin offering, to make 



!-!-! XXIX. NUMBERS. 

23 atonement for yon ; over and above the whole burnt offering 
which is to be made every morning, and which is a continual 

24 whole burnt offering. After this manner you shall make daily 
offerings, during the seven days, as a gift — an offering of ho- 
mage, for a smell of fragrance, to the Lord : Over and above 
the continual whole burnt offering, thou shalt offer it with its 

25 libation. And the seventh of these days shall be solemnly set 
apart for you. On it you shall do no sacrificial work. 

26 And on the day of new things when you bring for the Lord 
the new sacrifice of the weeks, there shall be a solemn festival 

27 for you. You shall not do any kind of sacrificial service ; but 
you shall bring, as whole burnt offerings, for a smell of fra- 
grance to the Lord, two young bulls from the herd, one ram, 

28 seven lambs, of the first year, without blemish, with their sacri- 
fice of fine flour mixed up with oil — three tenths for each bull, 
and two tenths for the ram, and one tenth for every of the se- 

29 ven lambs ; and one kid of the goats, for a sin offering, to make 

30 atonement for you. Over and above the continual whole burnt 

31 offering, you shall offer me the sacrifice of these (and see that 
they be without blemish) together with the libations thereof. 

XXIX. And in the seventh month on the first day of the 
month, there shall be a solemn festival for you. You shall do 

2 no sacrificial work. It shall be to you a day of alarm. And 

3 you shall offer as whole burnt offerings — for a smell of fra- 
grance to the Lord, one young bull from the herd ; one ram, 
seven lambs, of the first year, without blemish, with their sa- 

4 crifice — fine flour mixed up with oil — three tenths for the 
bull, and two tenths for the ram, and a tenth for every one of 

5 the seven lambs ; and a kid of the goats, for a sin offering, to 

6 make atonement for you, over and above the whole burnt of- 
ferings of the new moon, with their sacrifices and their liba- 
tions, and the continual whole burnt offering. And their sacri- 
fices, and their libations, shall be according to what is prescrib- 
ed for them, for a smell of fragrance to the Lord. 

7 And the tenth of this month shall be a solemn day set apart 
for you, on which you shall afflict your souls, and do no kind 

8 of work. But you shall offer, as whole burnt offerings for a 
smell of fragrance for the Lord — as offerings of homage to the 
Lord, one young bull from the herd, one ram, seven lambs of 



!-!-! XXIX. NUMBERS. 

9 the first year (you shall see that they be without blemish) with 

10 their sacrifice — fine flour mixed up with oil; three tenths for 
the bull, and two tenths for the ram, and a tenth for every one 

11 of the seven lambs ; and a kid of the goats, for a sin offering, 
to make atonement for you, over and above the sin offering of 
the atonement, and the continual whole burnt offering. And 
the sacrifice of this, and the libation of this, shall be according 
to what is prescribed, for a smell of fragrance — an offering of 
homage to the Lord. 

12 And on the fifteenth day of this seventh month, there shall be 
a solemn festival set apart for you. You shall do no sacrificial 

13 work. And you shall celebrate this festival to the Lord seven 
days. And you shall bring, for whole burnt offerings — for an 
offering of homage — for a smell of fragrance to the Lord, on 
the first day, thirteen young bulls from the herd, two rams, 
fourteen lambs of the first year, (they shall be without ble- 

14 mish) with their sacrifices — fine flour mixed up with oil — 
three tenths for every one of the thirteen bulls, and two tenths 

15 for each of the two rams, and one tenth for every one of the 

16 fourteen lambs ; and a kid of the goats for a sin offering, over 
and above the continual whole burnt offerings with their sa- 

17 crifices and their libations. And on the second day, twelve 
young bulls, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year, with- 

18 out blemish, with their sacrifice and their libation, for the bulls 
and the rams, and the lambs, according to their number agree- 

19 ably to what is prescribed for them ; and a kid of the goats 
for a sin offering, over and above the continual whole burnt 

20 offerings, with their sacrifices and their libations. And on 
the third day, eleven young bulls, two rams, fourteen lambs 

21 of the first year, without blemish, with their sacrifices and 
their libations, for the bulls, and the rams, and the lambs, ac- 
cording to their number, agreeably to what is prescribed for 

22 them ; and a kid of the goats for a sin offering, over and above 
the contiDual whole burnt offerings, with their sacrifices and 

2o their libations. And on the fourth day, ten young bulls, two 
rams, fourteen lambs of the first year, without blemish, with 

24 their sacrifices and their libations, for the bulls and the rams, and 
the lambs, according to the number of them agreeably to what 

25 is prescribed for them ; and a kid of the goats for a sin offer- 



!-!-! XXX. NUMBERS. 

ing, over and above the continual whole burnt offerings, with 

26 their sacrifices and their libations. And on the fifth day, nine 
young bulls, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year, with- 

27 out blemish, with their sacrifices and their libations ; for the 
bulls and the rams, and the lambs, according to the number 

28 of them agreeably to what is prescribed for them ; and a kid 
of the goats for a sin offering, over and above the continual 
whole burnt offerings, with their sacrifices and their libations. 

29 And on the sixth day, eight young bulls, two rams, fourteen 
lambs of the first year, without blemish, with their sacrifices 

30 and their libations ; for the bulls, and the rams, and the lambs, 
according to the number of them agreeably to what is prescrib- 

31 ed for them ; and a kid of the goats for a sin offering, over and 
above the continual whole burnt offerings, with their sacrifices 

32 and their libations. And on the seventh day, seven young- 
bulls ; two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year, without 

33 blemish, with their sacrifices and their libations ; for the bulls 
aud the rams, and the lambs, according to the number of them 

34 agreeably to what is prescribed for them ; and a kid of the 
goats for a sin offering, over and above the continual whole 

35 burnt offerings, with their sacrifices and their libations. And 
on the eighth day, you shall close the festival. On that day you 

36 shall not do any kind of sacrificial work. But you shall bring for 
whole burnt offerings — for a smell of fragrance ; for offerings 
of homage to the Lord, one young bull, one ram, seven lambs 

37 of the first year, without blemish, with their sacrifices and their 
libations, for the bull, and the ram, and the lambs, according 
to the number of them, agreeably to what is prescribed for 

38 them ; and a kid of the goats for a sin offering, over and above 
the continual whole burnt offerings, with their sacrifices and 
their libations. 

39 These you shall offer to the Lord at your festivals, over 
and above your vows, and your free will offerings, and your 
whole burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your libations, 

40 and your offerings of thanksgiving. So Moses spoke to the 
children of Israel according to all that the Lord commanded 
him. 

XXX. Moreover Moses spoke to the chiefs of the tribes of the 
2 children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the Lord 



!-!-! XXX. NUMBEKS. 

hath commanded. If any man vow a vow to the Lord, or swear an 
oath, or bind himself with a solemn promise concerning his soul, 
he shall not break his word. Whatever hath proceeded from his 
3 mouth he shall do. And if a woman vow to the Lord, or bind 
¦1 herself with a solemn promise, in her father's house, in her 
youth ; and her father hear her vows, and her promises with 
which she hath bound her soul, and hold his peace at her ; all 
her vows, and all the promises with which she bound her soul, 

5 shall stand. They shall be binding on her. But if her father 
expressly disapprove on the day he heareth her vows and the 
promises, with which she hath bound her soul, they shall not 
stand. And the Lord will acquit her because her father hath 

6 disallowed her. And if she be married, and vows be upon her ; 

7 according to the opening of her lips — with what promises so- 
ever she may have bound her soul, if her husband shall hear, 
and hold his peace at her on the day when he heareth, so shall 
all her vows stand, and the promises shall stand with which 

8 she hath bound her soul. But if her husband expressly disal- 
low her on the day when he shall hear, none of her vows, and 
none of the obligations with which she hath bound her soul, 
shall be binding, because her husband disallowed her. And 

9 the Lord will acquit her. But the vows of a widow, or of one 
divorced — whatever vows she may have made to bind her 

10 soul, shall stand against her. And if her vow, or the obliga- 
tion with which she bound her soul with an oath, be made in 

11 her husband's house ; and her husband shall hear, and hold 
his peace at her, and not disallow her ; all her vows and all her 
promises with which she hath bound her soul shall stand 

12 against her. But if her husband on the day when he heareth, 
actually disannul all that may have proceeded out of her lips, 
of what nature soever her vows may be, or the obligations 
with which she bound her soul, they shall not be binding on 
her. Her husband hath made them void, and the Lord will 

13 acquit her. Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict her 

14 soul, her husband may establish, or make void. And if lie hold 
his peace at her, day after day, he shall establish upon her all 
her vows, and confirm the obligations upon her, because he held 

15 his peace at her on the day he heard them. And if her hus- 

vol. i. n n 



!-!-! XXXI. NUMBERS. 

band disannul them after the day when he heard, he shall 

bear the sin of this. 
16 These are the judgments which the Lord gave in charge to 

Moses, between a husband and wife, and between a father 

and a daughter in her youth, in her father's house. 
XXXI. Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Avenge the 

2 cause of the children of Israel on the Madianites, and after- 

3 ward thou shalt be gathered to thy people. Whereupon Mo- 
ses spoke to the people, saying, Arm men from among you 
and array them before the Lord, against Madian, to pour ven- 

4 geance from the Lord on Madian — a thousand from every 

5 tribe. You shall send them out of all the tribes to be drawn 
up in array. So out of the thousands of Israel they numbered 
a thousand from a tribe — twelve thousand. They were armed 

6 for close engagement. And Moses sent these — a thousand 
from every tribe ; and with the army composed of them, Phi- 
neas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron the priest, with the holy in- 
struments — the trumpets for sounding a charge, in their hands. 

7 And they drew up in array against Madian, as the Lord com- 

8 manded Moses, and slew every male ; and in the slaughter they 
slew the kings of Madian, Evin, and Rokon, and Sur, and Ur, 

9 and Robok, the five kings of Madian. They slew also Balaam, 
son of Beor, with the sword among their slain. And having 
taken for a prey the women of the Madianites, and their furni- 
ture, and their cattle, and all their goods, and spoiled their ar- 

10 my, and burned all their cities in which they dwelt, and all their 

11 sheepcots, with fire, and taken all the prey thereof, and all the 

12 spoils thereof, both of man and beast, they brought to Moses, 
and Eleazar, and to all the Israelites, the captives, and the 
spoils, and the prey, to the camp at Araboth-Moab, on the Jor- 

13 dan, over against Jericho. And when Moses went out, accom- 
panied with Eleazar the priest, and all the chiefs of the con- 

14 gregation, to meet them without the camp, Moses was an- 

15 gry at the officers of the army — at the captains of thousands, 
and the captains of hundreds, who came from the war. And 

16 Moses said to them, Why have you saved all the women alive ? 
For they, by the direction of Balaam, were the cause of Is- 
rael's apostatizing, and transgressing the commands of the 

17 Lord, for the sake of Phogor : and there was a plague in the 



!-!-! XXXI. NUMBEKS. 

congregation of the Lord. Now therefore kill every male 
among the captives. Kill also every woman, who hath lain 

18 with man. But save alive, for yourselves, every captive among 
the women, who hath not known a man. And abide without 

19 the camp seven days. Every one who hath slain, or who hath 
touched one slain, must be purified on the third day, and on 

20 the seventh day, including yourselves and your captives. And 
you must purify every covering, and every vessel made of 
skin, and every hair cloth, and every utensil of wood. 

21 Then Eleazar the priest, said to the men of the army, who 
came from the war, This is the ordinance of the law, which 

22 the Lord gave in charge to Moses, Besides the gold, and the 
silver, and the brass, and the iron, and the lead, and the tin, 
every thing which can pass through fire must be purified by 

23 fire; but the rest are to be purified by the water of purifica- 
tion only. Whatever cannot pass through fire must pass 

2-1 through water. And on the seventh day you must wash your 
clothes, and you shall be clean ; and after that you may come 
into the camp. 

25 Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Take the sum of 

26 the captivated prey both of man and beast ; thou, and Eleazar 
the priest, and the chiefs of the patriarchal houses of the con- 

27 gregation. And you shall divide the prey between the warriors 

28 who went to battle, and the whole congregation. And you shall 
set apart as a tribute to the Lord, from the warriors who went 
out to battle, one in five hundred from the captives, and from 
the beasts, namely, the cattle, and the sheep, and the asses. 

29 These you shall take from their half, and give to Eleazar the 

30 priest, as a portion set apart for the Lord. And from the chil- 
dren of Israel's half thou shalt take one in fifty of the captives, 
and of the cattle, and the sheep, and the asses — of all these 
beasts. And these thou shalt give to the Levites, who keep 

31 the watch at the tabernacle of the Lord. So Moses and Eleazar 

32 the priest did as the Lord commanded Moses. And the whole 
amount of the booty which the warriors had taken, was, of 

33 sheep six hundred and seventy five thousand ; of cattle seven- 

34 ty two thousand, and sixty one thousand asses ; and of the 

35 human species, namely, of the women who had not known 

36 man, all the souls were thirty two thousand. So that the half 
which was the share of those who went to war, was, from the 



!-!-! XXXII. NUMBEKS. 

number of sheep, three hundred and thirty seven thousand 

37 five hundred ; of which the tribute for the Lord was six hun- 

38 dred and seventy five ; and of cattle, thirty six thousand, 

39 of which the tribute for the Lord was seventy two ; and of asses, 

40 thirty thousand five hundred, of which the tribute for the 
Lord was sixty one ; and the human beings were sixteen 
thousand, of whom the tribute for the Lord was thirty two. 

41 And this tribute for the Lord, this dedication made to God 
by setting it apart, Moses gave to Eleazar the priest as the 

42 Lord commanded Moses. And from the half belonging to the 
children of Israel, between whom and the warriors Moses had 
made the division ; now the congregation's half was three 
hundred and thirty seven thousand five hundred sheep, thirty 
six thousand cattle, thirty thousand five hundred asses, and 

47 of human beings, sixteen thousand — from this half, be- 
longing to the children of Israel, Moses took one in fifty, of 
man and beast, and gave them to the Levites, who kept the 
watch at the tabernacle of the testimony, as the Lord com- 
manded Moses. 

48 Then all the officers over the thousands of the army, the 
captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, came to 

49 Moses, and said to him, Thy servants have taken an account 
of all the warriors who were with us, and there is not one of 

50 them missing. We have therefore brought, as every man 
chanced to find a jewel of gold, either a necklace, or a brace- 
let, or a ring, or an ornament for the right arm, or a chain, to 

51 make atonement for us before the Lord. So Moses and Elea- 
zar the priest, received from them the gold — all the wrought 

52 jewels; and the whole amount of the gold, the dedication 
which they set apart for the Lord, was, sixteen thousand seven 
hundred and fifty shekels. This they received from the cap- 

53 tains of thousands, and captains of hundreds. Of the spoil, 
which the warriors made every man for himself, Moses and 
Eleazar the priest received the gold from the captains of thou- 

54 sands, and the captains of hundreds, and brought it into the 
tabernacle of the testimony, to be a memorial of the children 
of Israel before the Lord. 

XXXII. Now the children of Keuben, and the children of Gad, 
had a great multitude of cattle, and having taken a view of the 



!-!-! XXXII. NUMBERS. 

country of Jazer, and the region of Galaad, and seen that it 

2 was a place fit for stock, the Reubenites and the Gadites came 
to Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and to the chiefs of the 

3 congregation and said, Ataroth, and Daibon, and Jazer, and 
Namra, and Esebon, and Eleale, and Sebama, and Nabo, and 

4 Baian, the land which the Lord delivered up before the chil- 
dren of Israel, is a land fit for raising stock, and thy servants 

5 have cattle ; if therefore, said they, we have found favour in 
thy sight, let this land be given to thy servants for a posses- 

6 sion, and cause us not to cross the Jordan. Whereupon Mo- 
ses said to the Gadites and the Reubenites, Must your bre- 

7 thren go to war, and you sit still here ? Besides, why do you 
divert the thoughts of the Israelites from crossing over into the 

8 land which the Lord giveth them? Did not your fathers do 
so, when I sent them from Kades-Barne to view the land? 

9 When they had passed through the valley of grapes, and view- 
ed the land, they discouraged the heart of the Israelites from 

10 going to the land which the Lord gave them ; and the anger 

11 of the Lord was kindled that day, and he sware saying, These 
men who came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old and 
upwards, who know good and evil, shall not see the land, 
which I with an oath promised to Abraham, and Isaak, and 

12 Jacob ; (for they have not followed me) save Chaleb, son of 
Jephonne, who separated himself from them, and Joshua, son 

13 of Nave, because they followed the Lord. So the anger of the 
Lord was kindled against Israel, and he led them about in the 
wilderness forty years, until all that generation, who had done 

14 evil in the sight of the Lord, was consumed. Behold you are 
risen up in your fathers' stead, a set of sinful men, to augment 

15 the wrath of the Lord against Israel. For by turning away from 
him, to cause him to leave you still in the wilderness, you will 
transgress against the whole congregation. 

16 Upon this they came near to him, and said, We will build 
sheepcots here for our cattle, and cities for our families, but 

17 we ourselves, completely armed, will march in the van before 

18 the children of Israel, until we bring them to their place. Our 
families indeed must dwell in walled cities, because of the in- 
habitants of the land, that we may not be under a necessi- 
ty of returning to our houses, until the children of Israel are 



!-!-! XXXII. NUMBEKS. 

19 parcelled out, every one in his possession. Moreover we will 
not take a share with thern of the land beyond the river Jordan, 
because we have got our share on the eastern side of the Jordan. 

20 Then Moses said to them, If you will act agreeably to what 
you say — if you will arm yourselves for battle before the Lord, 

21 and every one, completely armed, will cross the Jordan before 
the Lord, until his enemy be crushed before him, and the land 

22 subdued before the Lord, after this you shall return, and be 
guiltless before the Lord, and acquitted by Israel, and this land 

23 shall be your possession before the Lord. But if you do not 
act in this manner, you will sin against the Lord, and you 

24 shall be sensible of your sin, when evils overtake you. Build 
therefore cities for your families, and sheepcots for your cat- 

25 tie, and perform what hath proceeded out of your mouth. And 
the sons of Keuben and the sons of Gad spake to Moses, say- 

26 ing, Thy servants will do as our Lord commandeth ; our fa- 
milies, and our wives, and our cattle, shall remain in the cities 

27 of Galaad ; but we thy servants will cross over, all armed, and ar- 

28 rayed for battle before the Lord, as our lord saith. Then Moses 
convened with them Eleazar the priest, and Joshua, son of Nave, 
and the chiefs of the patriarchal houses of the tribes of Israel, 

29 and said to them, If the Keubenites and the Gadites cross 
the Jordan with you, every one armed for battle before the 
Lord, when you shall have subdued the land before you, you 

30 shall give them the land of Galaad for a possession. But if they 
decline to cross with you, armed for battle before the Lord ; 
you shall drive before you their families, and their wives, and 
their cattle, into the land of Chanaan, and they shall have a 

31 portion with you in the land of Chanaan. And the Keubenites 
and the Gadites answered, saying, All that our lord saith to 

32 his servants we will do. We will cross over, completely arm- 
ed before the Lord, into the land of Chanaan, and you shall 

33 give us our possession on this side of the Jordan. So Moses 
gave them, namely, to the Gadites and the Keubenites, and to 
the half of the tribe of Manasses, one of the sons of Joseph, 
the kingdom of Seon, king of the Amorites, and the kingdom 
of Og king of Basan, the land and the cities, with the bounda- 

34 ries thereof, even the cities of the land round about. And the 

35 Gadites rebuilt Daibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer, and Sophar, 



!-!-! XXXIII. NUMBERS. 

36 and Jazer, and raised these, namely, Naniraro and Baithara, 

37 fenced cities, and folds for sheep. And the Reubenites rebuilt 
Esebon, and Eleale, and Kariatharn, and Beelmeon, which 

38 they enclosed all around, and Sebama ; and they named the 

39 cities which they rebuilt after their own names. Now a de- 
scendant of Machir, son of Manasses, had gone to Galaad, and 

40 taken it, and destroyed the Amorite who dwelt there. So Mo- 
ses gave Galaad to the community of Machir, son of Manas- 

41 ses, and they dwelt there. And Jair, of the tribe of Manasses, 
went and took their sheepcots, and called them the sheep- 

42 cots of Jair. And Nabau went and took Kaath, and its vil- 
lages, and called them Naboth after his own name. 

XXXIII. Now these are the encampments of the Israelites. 
When they came out of the land of Egypt, with their army, 

2 by the ministry of Moses and Aaron, Moses committed to wri- 
ting their removals and encampments, by the command of the 
Lord, and these are the encampments of their march. 

3 They removed from Ramesses, in the first month, on the 
fifteenth day of the first month. On the next morning after 
the passover, the Israelites came out with a high hand, in the 

4 sight of all the Egyptians, while they were burying their dead 
— all those whom the Lord had smitten — even all the first 
born of the land of Egypt. When the Lord had executed 

5 vengeance on their gods, the children of Israel, removing 

6 from Ramesses, encamped at Sokchoth. And removing from 
Sokchoth, they encamped at Bouthan, which is a part of 

7 the wilderness. And they removed from Bouthan, and en- 
camped at the mouth of Eirath, which is over against Beelsep- 

8 phon. They encamped also over against Magdolus. And 
they removed from over against Eirath, and crossed through 
the midst of the sea, into the wilderness, and having marched 
three days' journey through the wilderness, they encamped at 

9 Bitterness. And they removed from Bitterness, and came to 
Ailam. Now at Ailam there were twelve fountains of water, 
and seventy palm trees. So they encamped there by the water. 

10 And they removed from Ailam, and encamped by the Red 

11 sea. And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in 

12 the wilderness of Sin. And they removed from the wilderness 

13 of Sin, and encamped at Raphaka. And they removed from 



!-!-! XXXIII. NUMBERS. 

14 Raphaka, and encamped at xiilus. Aud they rem oved from 
Ailus and encamped at Raphadin, where there was no water 

15 for the people to drink. And they removed from Raphadin, 

16 and encamped in the wilderness of Sina. And they removed 
from the wilderness of Sina, and encamped at The monu- 

17 ments of longing desire. And they removed from The monn- 

18 ments of longing desire, and encamped at Aseroth. And they 

19 removed from Aseroth, and encamped at Rathama. And they 
removed from Rathama, and encamped at Remmon-Phares. 

20 And they removed from Remmon-Phares, and encamped at 

21 Lebona. And they removed from Lebona, and encamped at 

22 Ressan. And they removed from Ressan, and encamped at 

23 Makellath. And they removed from Makellath, and encamp- 

24 ed at Saphan. And they removed from Saphan, and encamp- 

25 ed at Charadath. And they removed from Charadath, and en- 

26 camped at Makeloth. xlnd they removed from Makeloth, and 

27 encamped at Kataath. And they removed from Kataath, and 

28 encamped at Tarath. And they removed from Tarath, and en- 

29 camped at Mathekka. And they removed from Mathekka, and 

30 encamped at Selmona. And they removed from Selmona, and 

31 encamped at Masnruth. And they removed from Masnrnth, 

32 and encamped at Banaia. And they removed from Banaia, 

33 and encamped at the mountain of Gadgad. And they remov- 
ed from the mountain of Gadgad, and encamped at Etebatha. 

34 And they removed from Etebatha, and encamped at Ebrona. 

35 And they removed from Ebrona, and encamped at Gesion- 

36 Gaber. And they removed from Gesion-Gaber, and encamped 
in the wilderness of Sin. And they removed from the wil- 
derness of Sin, and encamped in the wilderness of Pharan, 

37 this is Kades. And they removed from Kades, and encamp- 

38 ed at Or, the mountain bordering on the land of Edom. And 
Aaron the priest went up at the command of the Lord, and 
died there, in the fortieth year of the children of Israel's com- 
ing out of Egypt, in the fifth month, the first day of the 

39 month. And Aaron was a hundred and twenty three years old 

40 when he died at mount Or. And the Chananite king of Arad, 
whose fixed abode was in the land of Chanaan, received intel- 
ligence when the children of Israel were marching in. And 

41 they removed from mount Or, and encamped at Selmona. And 



!-!-! XXXIV. NUMBERS. 

43 they removed from Selmona, and encamped at Phino. And 

44 they removed from Phino, and encamped at Oboth. And they 
removed from Oboth, and encamped at Gai, on the borders 

45 of Moab. And they removed from Gai, and encamped at 

46 Daibon-gad. And they removed from Daibon-gad, and en- 

47 camped at Gelmon-deblathaim. And they removed from Gel- 
mon-deblathaim, and encamped on the mountains Abarim, over 

48 against Nabo. And they removed from the mountains Abarim, 
and encamped on the west of Moab, by the Jordan, opposite to 
Jericho. 

49 And when they were encamped on the Jordan, from Aisi- 

50 moth to Belsa, which is on the west of Moab, the Lord spoke 
to Moses on the west of Moab by the Jordan, in front of Jericho, 

51 saying, Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to 
them, You are now going to cross the Jordan into the land of 

52 Chanaan. You shall destroy all those who dwell in that land, 
from before you, and demolish their obelisks, and utterly de- 
stroy their molten images, and all their pillars you shall demo- 

53 lish. And when you have destroyed all the inhabitants of that 
land, you shall dwell therein ; for I have given you their land 
by lot, and you shall divide their land, by lot, among your 

54 tribes. To those who are more numerous you shall give a 
larger possession ; and to those who are fewer in number you 
shall give a smaller possession. On whatever place any one's 
name falleth, there shall be his possession. According to the 

55 tribes of your families you shall possess it. But if you do not de- 
stroy the inhabitants of the land from before you, it will come to 
pass, that those of them whom you shall leave, will be thorns in 
your eyes, and darts in your sides, and your mortal enemies 

56 in the land wherein you dwell. x\.nd it will come to pass that 
I will deal with you as I determined to deal with them. 

XXXIV. Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses saying, Give a 
charge to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, 

2 You are about to enter the laud of Chanaan. This you shall 
have for an inheritance, even the whole land of Chanaan, with 

3 its borders. And your southern border shall be, from the wil- 

4 derness of Sin, until it joineth Edom. And your boundaries 
on the south shall be, from a part of the salt sea on the east, 
and that boundary shall encompass you on the south, to the 

vol. i. o o 



!-!-! XXXIV. NUMBERS. 

ascent of Acrabin, and shall pass on to Ennak, and run along 
south of Kades-barne and come to the sheepcot of Arad, and 

5 pass along by Asemona : and from Asemona the boundary- 
shall wind round along the brook of Egypt, and its termination 

6 shall be the sea. Then you shall have the sea for a boundary. 
The great sea shall bound you : this shall be your western 

7 boundary. And your boundary on the north shall be this — 
from the great sea you shall measure off for yourselves, along 

S the range of mountains — from mountain to mountain you shall 
measure off for yourselves : beginning at the bay of Emath, 

9 and extending along the border of Saradak, the boundary 
shall come out along the borders of Dephrona and its termina- 
tion shall be Arsenain. This shall be your northern boundary. 

10 Then you shall measure off for yourselves the eastern boun- 

11 dary from Arsenain to Seppharuar; and from Sepphamar the 
boundary shall run down to Bela, on the east of the fountains, 
then down along the borders of Bela, on the eastern side of the 

12 sea of Chenerith ; then down the Jordan ; and its termination 

13 shall be the salt sea. This shall be your land and these its bounda- 
ries round about. So Moses gave a charge to the Israelites say- 
ing, This is the land which you shall parcel out, by lot, in the man- 
ner the Lord hath commanded it to be given to the nine tribes, 

l-l and to the half of the tribe of Manasses ; because the tribe of 
the Reubenites, and the tribe of the Gadites, according to the 
houses of their families, and the half of the tribe of the Manas- 

15 sites, have received their allotments. Two tribes, and the half 
of a tribe, have received their lots on the south east side of the 
Jordan, in front of Jericho. 

16 Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, These are the 

17 names of the men who shall parcel out the land for you — Ele- 

18 azar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nave, xlnd you shall 
take one chief of a tribe to divide the land among you by lot. 

19 And these are the names of the men — Of the tribe of Judas, 

20 Chaleb son of Jephonne ; of the tribe of Symeon, Salamiel son 

21 of Samiud ; of the tribe of Benjamin, Eldad son of Chaslon ; 

22 of the tribe of Dan, chief Bakchir, son of Egli ; of the children 

23 of Joseph— of the tribe of the Manassites, chief Aniel, son of 

24 Suphi; of the tribe of the Ephraimites, chief Kamuel, son of 

25 Sabathan ; of the tribe of Zabulon, chief Elisaphan, son of 

26 Pharnach ; of the tribe of Issachar, chief Phaltiel, son of Oza ; 



!-!-! XXXV. NUMBERS. 

27 Of the tribe of Aser, chief Achior, son of Selemi ; of the tribe 

28 of Nephthaleim, chief Phadael, son of Jamiud. To these the 

29 Lord gave it in charge to parcel out to the Israelites their allot- 
ments in the land of Chanaan. 

XXXV. Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, on the west of 
Moab, by the Jordan, over against Jericho, saying, Command 

2 the children of Israel ; and let them give the Levites, out of the 
lots of their possession, cities to dwell in. They shall also give 

3 the Levites the suburbs of these cities round about. The cities 
shall be for them to dwell in ; and the suburbs thereof shall be 

4 for their cattle, even for all their beasts. Now the suburbs of 
the cities, which you shall give to the Levites, shall be from the 
wall of the city, outwards, two thousand cubits all around. 

5 Thou shalt therefore measure off, outwards from the city, 
on the east side two thousand cubits, on the south side two 
thousand cubits, on the west side two thousand cubits, and on 
the north side two thousand cubits, and in the middle of this 
shall be your city ; and you shall give these suburbs of the ci- 

6 ties with the cities, to the Levites. Six of the cities which you 
shall give shall be cities of refuge for the manslayer to flee to, 

7 and besides these you shall give forty two cities. All the cities, 

8 which you shall give to the Levites, shall be forty eight. These 
cities with their suburbs, even the cities which you shall give, 
shall be from the possessions of the children of Israel. They 
shall give the Levites, out of their cities, many from those who 
have many, and few from them who have few ; from every one 
according to the inheritance which they possess. 

9 Moreover the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to the 

10 children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, You are about 
to cross the Jordan into the land of Chanaan, and you will set 
apart for yourselves cities, which shall be your places of refuge, 

11 to which the manslayer may flee. When any person killeth ano- 

12 ther unwittingly, those cities will be places of refuge from the 
avenger of blood, that the manslayer may not die, until he stand 

13 before the congregation for trial. Therefore, with regard to the 
cities which you shall give, six shall be your places of refuge ; 

14 three of these cities you shall give on this side of the Jordan, and 

15 three such cities you shall give in the land of Chanaan. They 
shall be a refuge for the children of Israel, and for the prose- 
lyte, and the sojourner among you. These cities are to be pla- 



!-!-! XXXV. NUMBEBS. 

ces of refuge, to which every one may flee who hath smitten a 

16 person unawares. But if he hath smitten him with an instru- 
ment of iron, and he die, he is a murderer ; let the murderer be 

17 put to death. And if he hath smitten him with a stone out of 
his hand, by which he might be killed, and he die ; he is a mur- 

18 derer ; let the murderer be put to death. And if he hath smit- 
ten him with any instrument of wood out of his hand, by which 
he might be killed, and he die ; he is a murderer ; let the mur- 

19 derer be put to death. The avenger of blood himself shall kill 

20 him. When he meeteth him he shall slay him. And if, through 
hatred, he hath pushed him down, or thrown at him from am- 

21 bush, any instrument whatever, and he die; or if on account 
of an old grudge he hath smitten him with his hand, and he die ; 
let him who smote be put to death : he is a murderer ; let the 
murderer be put to death. The avenger of blood shall slay the 

22 murderer when he meeteth him. But if on a sudden, not 
through malice aforethought, he hath pushed him down, or 

23 thrown any instrument at him, not from ambush, nor with any 
stone by which he might be killed, or not seeing him, and it 

24 light upon him, and he die, and he was not his enemy, nor 
seeking to do him any injury, the congregation shall judge be- 
tween him who smote, and the avenger of blood, according to 

25 these rules of decision ; and the congregation shall deliver the 
slayer from the avenger of blood, and the congregation shall 
send him back to the city of his refuge, to which he fled ; and 
he shall dwell there, till the death of the high priest, whom they 

26 have anointed with holy oil. And if the manslayer go out of 
the bounds of the city of his refuge to which he fled, and 

27 the avenger of blood find him out of the bounds of the city 

28 of his refuge, and the avenger of blood kill the slayer, he 
is not guilty of death. For he should have remained in the 
city of refuge till the death of the high priest. After the 
death of the high priest the slayer may return to the land 

29 of his possession. These shall be your rules of decision, 

30 for your generations, in all your dwellings. When any one 
hath slain a person, thou shalt put to death the murderer, 
by witnesses ; but one witness shall not testify against a person 

31 to cause him to be put to death. And you shall take no ran- 
som for life from a manslayer who is guilty of death ; for he 

32 must be put to death : nor shall you take any ransom from him 



!-!-! XXXVI. NUMBERS. 

who hath fled to a city of refuge, that he may dwell again in 

33 his land, until the death of the high priest. So you will not pol- 
lute with blood the land in which you dwell ; for this blood 
polluteth the land ; and the land cannot be cleansed from the 
blood which is shed in it, but by the blood of him who shed it. 

34 You must not defile the land in which you dwell — in which I 
dwell among you ; for I the Lord dwell among the children of 
Israel. 

XXXVI. Then came the chiefs of the community of the chil- 
dren of Galaad, son of Machir, son of Manasses, of the tribe 
of the children of Joseph, and spoke before Moses, and before 
Eleazar the priest, and before the chiefs of the patriarchal 

2 houses of the Israelites, and said, The Lord hath commanded 
our lord to give the land of inheritance by lot to the children 
of Israel ; and the Lord hath commanded our lord to give the 

3 inheritance of Salpaad, our brother, to his daughters. Now 
they may become wives to one of the communities of the Is- 
raelites, and their lot may be taken from the possession of our 
fathers, and added to the inheritance of that tribe among which 
they may be married ; so their inheritance may be taken from 

4 the lot of our inheritance ; and though there may be a jubilee 
of the children of Israel, still their inheritance will be added to 
the inheritance of the tribe among whom they may have been 
married, and their inheritance will be taken from the inheri- 

5 tance of our patriarchal tribe. Whereupon Moses gave a charge 
to the children of Israel, by the command of the Lord, saying, 

6 In regard to what the tribe of the children of Joseph say, This 
is the thing which the Lord hath commanded the daughters 
of Salpaad, saying, Let them marry whom they please, but 

7 they must marry men of the community of their father, so there 
shall be no transferring of inheritance among the children of 
Israel, from one tribe to another. Because the children of Is- 
rael must be kept together, every one in the inheritance of the 

8 patriarchal family of his tribe, therefore every daughter, who 
by being next of kin, inheriteth a possession among the tribes of 
Israel, must marry one of the community of her father, that 
the children of Israel may inherit by nearness of kin, every one 

9 the inheritance of his father's family : by which means the al- 
lotment will not be transferred from one tribe to another ; but 



!-!-! XXXVI. NUMBERS. 

the Israelites will be kept together every one in his inheritance. 

10 Accordingly they did, for the daughters of Salpaad, in the 

11 manner the Lord commanded Moses, and Thersa, and Egla, 
and Melcha, and Nua, and Maala, the daughters of Salpaad, 

12 were married to their cousins. They were married to men of 
the tribe of Manasses, one of the sons of Joseph, and their in- 
heritance was kept in the tribe, to which the community of 
their father belonged. 

13 These are the commands, and the statutes, and the judg- 
ments, which the Lord gave in charge, by the ministry of 
Moses, on the west of Moab, on the Jordan, over against 
Jericho. — 

DEUTERONOMY. 

I. These are the words which Moses spoke to all Israel, on 
the bank of the Jordan, west of the wilderness which reacheth 
to the Red sea, between Pharantophal and Lobon, and Aulon, 

2 and Katachrusea, eleven days' journey from Choreb, the way 
by mount Seir to Kades-Barne. 

3 In the fortieth year, the eleventh month, on the first day 
of the month, Moses spoke to all the children of Israel, accord- 

4 ing to all that the Lord had given him in charge to them. After 
he had smitten Seon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Ese- 

5 bon ; and Og, king of Basan, who dwelt at Astaroth and 
Edrain, Moses began, on the bank of the Jordan, in the land 
of Moab, to explain the law fully, saying. 

6 The Lord our God spoke to us at Choreb, saying, You 

7 have tarried long enough by this mount. Turn ; strike your 
tents, and march to the mountain of the Amorites, and to all 
the inhabitants around Araba — to the mountain and to the 
plain, and to the south, and to the land of the Chananites, on 
the sea shore, and to Antilibanus, till you reach the river — 

8 the great river Euphrates. Behold I have delivered up the land 
before you. Go in, and take possession of the land, which 
with an oath I promised to give to your fathers — to Abraham, 
and Isaak, and Jacob — to them and their seed after them. 

9 Then I spoke to you at that time, saying, I am not able 
10 alone to bear you. The Lord your God hath multiplied you ; 



!-!-! T. DEUTERONOMY. 

and behold you are this day like the stars of heaven for mul- 

11 titude. May the Lord, the God of your fathers, add to you a 
thousand times as many as you are, and bless you as he hath 

12 promised' you ! How can I alone bear the burden of you, even 

13 the whole weight of you, and your contentions ? Appoint for 
yourselves men of wisdom, knowledge and understanding, for 
your several tribes, and I will make them leaders over you. 

14 And you answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast 

15 proposed to do is good. So I took from among you men of 
wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, and appointed them 
to be leaders over you — captains of thousands, and captains 
of hundreds, and captains of fifties, and captains of tens ; and 

16 promulgators of the law for your judges. And I gave a charge 
to your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes between 
your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and 

17 his brother, and the stranger who is with him. Thou shalt not 
respect a person in judgment. Against the low and the high 
thou shalt pass sentence, and not be afraid of the face of man ; 
for the judgment is God's. And if the matter be too hard for 

18 you, bring it to me, and I will hear it. And when I had given 

19 you in charge, at that time, all the things which you were to 
do, we removed from Choreb, and marched through all that 
great and frightful wilderness which you saw, on the way to 
the mountain of the Amorite, as the Lord our God command- 

20 ed us. And when we came to Kades-barne, I said to you, 
You are come to the mountain of the Amorite, which the 

21 Lord our God giveth you. Behold the Lord your God hath 
delivered up to you the land before you. Go up and take pos- 
session of it, as the Lord, the God of your fathers, commanded 

22 you. Fear not, nor be faint hearted. Whereupon you all came 
to me, and said, Let us send men before us, and let them tra- 
verse the land for us, and bring us word what way we shall go 

23 up, and to what cities we shall come. And the proposal was 
agreeable to me. So I took from among you twelve men — a 

24 man for every tribe. And they turned, and went up to the 

25 mountain, and came to the valley of the bunch of grapes. And 
when they had thoroughly viewed it, they took in their hands 
some of the fruit of the land, and brought it to you, and said, 

26 The land is good, which the Lord our God giveth us. Not- 



!-!-! I. DEUTERONOMY. 

27 withstanding this, you would not go up ; but disobeyed the 
command of the Lord our God, and murmured in your tents, 
saying, Because the Lord hateth us he hath brought us out of 
the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hands of the Amo- 

28 rites, to destroy us utterly, wherever we go. When your bre- 
thren disheartened you, saying, It is a nation great and nume- 
rous, and stronger than we ; and the cities are large, and wal- 
led up to the sky. Indeed we have seen there sons of giants. 

29 I said to you, Be not terrified, nor afraid of them. The Lord 

30 your God is marching before you. He will assist you in subdu- 
ing them, according to all that he hath done for you in the land 

31 of Egypt, and in that wilderness, which you have seen in your 
march to this mountain of the Amorite. The Lord thy God 
will take charge of thee, as a man would of a son — as he hath 

32 done all the way you marched, till you came to this place. Not- 

33 withstanding this speech you did not confide in the Lord our 
God who was marching before you in the way to chuse a place 
for you, conducting you by night with fire, pointing out to 
you the way in which you were to march ; and by day, with 

34 a pillar of cloud. And the Lord heard the sound of your words, 

35 and being provoked to wrath, he sware saying, Not one of 
these men shall see that good land which I, with an oath, pro- 

36 mised their fathers, save Chaleb son of Jephonne. He shall 
see it. And to him I will give the land to which he went up, 
and to his children, because he vindicateth the cause of the 

37 Lord. With me also the Lord was angry on your account, 

38 and said, Neither shalt thou go in there. Joshua son of Nave 

39 who is thy attendant — he shall go thither. Encourage him, 
for he shall distribute it, by lot, to Israel. And with respect 
to your children, who do not know good or evil, they shall 
go thither, and to them I will give it, and they shall inherit it. 

40 But as for you, turn, and march into the wilderness, by the way 

41 to the Red sea. Then you answered, and said, We have sin- 
ned before the Lord our God. We will go up, and fight ac- 
cording to all that the Lord our God commanded us. So, every 
one seizing his implements of war, you assembled tumultu- 

42 ously to go up the mountain. Whereupon the Lord said to 
me, Say to them, You shall not go up, nor fight ; for I am not 

43 with you. And you should not be trodden down before your 



!-!-! II. DEUTERONOMY. 

enemies. Accordingly I spoke to you ; but you hearkened not 
to me ; but transgressed the command of the Lord, and pre- 

44 sumptuously ascended the mountain. And the Amorites, who 
dwelt on the mountain, came out to meet you, and pursued 
you, as bees would do, and slaughtered you from Seir to Her- 

45 ma. Then you sat down, and wept before the Lord our God ; 
but the Lord hearkened not to your voice, nor paid attention to 
you. So you abode at Kades many days, as many as you had 

II. staid there before. Then we turned, and took up our march 
into the wilderness, by the way to the Eecl sea, as the Lord 

2 spoke to me. And when we had been many days circling 

3 round mount Seir, the Lord said to me, You have been long- 
enough circling round this mountain, therefore turn northward, 

4 and give thou a charge to this people, saying, Y r ou are about 
to march along by the borders of your brethren, the children 
of Esau who inhabit Seir. They will be afraid of you, and 

5 dread you exceedingly. Y r ou must not come to battle with 
them ; for I will not give you a foot of their land, because I 
have given mount Seir to the children of Esau for a possession. 

6 Buy provisions of them for money, that you may eat, and re- 
ceive of them water by measure, for money, that you may 

7 drink ; (for the Lord our God had blessed thee in all the works 
of thy hands.) 

Recollect how thou didst traverse that great and frightful 
wilderness. Behold ! for forty years the Lord thy God was with 

8 thee. Thou wast not in want of any thing. And when we had 
passed by our brethren the children of Esau, who inhabit 
Seir, by the way of Araba, from Ailon to Gesion-gaber, and 

9 wheeling about had crossed the wilderness of Moab, the Lord 
said to me, Act not as enemies against the Moabites ; nor come 
to a battle with them ; for I will not give you for a possession 
any of their land ; for I have given Aroer to the children of Lot, 

10 that they may inherit it. (Now the Ommins had formerly dwelt 

11 there, a nation great and numerous, and mighty as the Ena- 
kims — they as well as the Enakims may be accounted Ra- 

12 phains ; but the Moabites call them Ommins. And in Seir the 
Chorrites were formerly settled, but the children of Esau de- 
stroyed them, and rooted them out from before them, and dwelt 
in their stead, in the same manner as Israel hath done with the 

vol. i. p p 



!-!-! II. DEUTERONOMY. 

13 land of their possession which the Lord hath given them.) Now 
therefore arise, and strike your tents, and cross the valley of 
Zaret. 

14 Now the time we spent from Kades-barne till we came to 
the valley of Zaret, was thirty eight years ; until all the genera- 

15 tion of the warriors had fallen, and died out of the camp. As 
the Lord had, with an oath denounced against them, the hand 
of the Lord was upon them to destroy them from among the 

16 host until they had all fallen. And when all the warriors had 

17 fallen, and died from among the people, the Lord spoke to me, 
saying, Thou art now to pass by Aroer, along the borders of 

18 Moab ; when you come near to the children of Amman you 

19 must not act hostilely against them, nor come to battle with 
them ; for I will not give thee any of the land of the children 
of Amman for a possession ; because I have given it for a pos- 

20 session to the children of Lot. (It may be accounted the land 
of the Eaphains, for the Raphains formerly dwelt there, but the 

21 Ammanites call them Zochommins. They, as well as the Ena- 
kims, were a nation great and numerous, and much stronger 
than you ; but the Lord destroyed them from before the Am- 
manites, and they took possession of the country, and have 

22 dwelt therein in their stead, even to this day. The same was 
the case with the children of Esau who inhabit Seir, they, in 
like manner, destroyed the Chorrites from before them, and 
took possession of their country, and have dwelt therein, in 

23 their stead, even to this day. So it was with the Evites when 
they dwelt in Asedoth even to Gaza, the Cappadocians, who 
came out of Cappadocia, rooted them out, and dwelt in their 

24 stead.) Now therefore arise, strike your tents, and cross the 
vale of Arnon ; behold I have delivered into thy hand Seon, 
king of Esebon, the Amorite, with his land. Begin to take pos- 

25 session. Join battle with him this day. Begin to impress the 
fear of thee, and the dread of thee, on the face of all the nations 
under heaven. They who hear of thy name shall tremble, and 
be in anguish because of thee. 

26 Now I had sent messengers from the wilderness of Keda- 

27 moth to Seon, king of Esebon, with words of peace, saying, 
Let me pass through thy land. I will march along the high- 

28 way, and not turn aside to the right, nor to the left. Thou shalt 



Ck. III. DEUTERONOMY. 

sell me provisions for money, that I may eat ; and thou shalt 
sell me water for money, that I may drink, just till I can march 

29 through on foot ; as the children of Esau, who dwell in Seir, 
and the children of Moab, who dwell in Aroer have done to 
me, until I cross the Jordan, to the land which the Lord our 

30 God giveth us. But Seon, king of Esebon, would not consent 
that we should pass by him, for the Lord our God had embold- 
ened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might be 
delivered into thy hands, as at this day. 

31 Then the Lord said to me, Behold I have begun to deliver 
up before thee Seon, king of Esebon, the Amorite, and his land. 

32 Begin therefore to take possession of his land. So Seon, king 
of Esebon, came out to meet us, he and all his people, to bat- 

33 tie at Jassa. And the Lord our God delivered him up before 

34 us. And we smote him and his sons, and all his people, and 
took all his cities at that time and utterly destroyed every city 

35 one after another ; with their wives and children. We left none 
to be taken alive. Besides making a prey of their cattle, we 

36 took the spoils of their cities. From Aroer, which is on the 
banks of the brook Arnon, including the city in the vale, even 
to mount Galaad, there was not a city which escaped us. The 

37 Lord our God delivered them all into our hands. Moreover, 
when, without approaching the children of Amman, we had 
taken all his territories on the brook Jabok, and his cities in 
the hilly country, as the Lord our God commanded us, we 

III. turned and went up the way to Basan. And when Og, 

2 king of Basan came out to meet us, he and all his people, to 
battle at Edrain, the Lord said to me, Fear him not ; for into 
thy hand I have delivered him, and all his people, and all his 
land ; and thou shalt do to him as thou hast done to Seon, the 

3 king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Esebon. So the Lord our 
God delivered also into our hands Og, king of Basan, and all 
his people, and we smote him till there was none of his seed left. 

4 And we took all his cities at that time. There was not a city 
which we did not take from them — three score cities, the whole 
region of Argob, belonging to Og, king of Basan ; All the ci- 

5 ties fortified with high walls, bars and gates, besides the towns 
of the Pherezites, which were very many, we utterly destroyed. 

6 As we had done to Seon, king of Esebon, we destroyed every 



!-!-! III. DEUTERONOMY. 

7 city, one after another, and the women and children. But all 
the cattle, and the spoils of the cities, we took for ourselves. 

8 So, at that time, we took this land out of the hands of the two 
kings of the Amorites, who were on the banks of the Jordan, 

9 from the brook Anion even to Aermon (now the Phoenicians 
call Aermon Sanior and the Amorites call it Sanir) including 

10 all the cities of Misor, and all Galaad, and all Basan, as far as 
Elcha, and Adraim, the cities of the kingdom of Og in Basan. 

11 (For besides Og, king of Basan, there was not one of the Ra- 
phains left. Behold his bed was a bed of iron. Behold it is in 
the citadel of the Ammanites. The length of it is nine cubits, 
and the breadth of it four cubits, after the cubit of a man.) 

12 And we took possession of this land, at that time, from Aroer, 
which is on the bank of the brook Arnon, and the half of mount 
Galaad ; and I gave all the cities thereof to Reuben, and Gad. 

13 And the rest of Galaad, and all Basan, the kingdom of Og, I 
gave to the half of the tribe of Manasses, with all the region of 
Argob, even all that part of Basan which is to be accounted the 

14 land of the Raphains. (Now when Jair the Manassite took the 
region of Argob, even to the borders of Gergesi, and Macha- 
thi, he called it after his own name Basan-Thavoth-Jair which 
is now its name.) 

15 Now when I gave Galaad to the Machirites and to Reu- 

16 ben and Gad, all below Galaad, to the brook Arnon, the 
middle of the brook being the boundary ; and as far as Jabok, 

17 this brook being the boundary of the Ammanites, and Araba, 
and the Jordan the boundary of Machanareth, even to the sea 

18 of Araba, the salt sea below Asedoth, the Phasga of the East, 
I gave you a charge at that time, saying, The Lord your God 
hath given you this land for a possession, you shall go armed 

19 before your brethren, the children of Israel, all of you who are 
fit for war, (but your wives, and your children, and your cat- 
tle, for I know that you have much cattle, are to dwell in your 

20 cities, which I have given you) until the Lord your God shall 
have given your brethren rest, as well as you ; and until they 
shall have taken possession of the land which the Lord our 

21 God giveth them, on the other side of the Jordan. Then you 
shall return, every one to his possession which I have given 
you. And at the same time I gave a charge to Joshua, saying, 



Oh. IV. DEUTERONOMY. 

Your eyes have seen all that the Lord our God hath done to 
these two kings. In the same manner the Lord our God will 
deal with all those kingdoms against which you are going to 

22 cross over. You shall not be afraid of them, for the Lord 

23 our God will fight for you. I also supplicated the Lord, at 

24 that time, saying, Lord God, thou hast begun to shew thy 
servant thy majesty, and thy power, and thy mighty hand, and 
thy outstretched arm ; for what god is there in heaven, or on 
earth, who can do as thou hast done, or according to thy ma- 

25 jesty. Let me cross over, and see that land, that good land 
which is beyond the Jordan, and that goodly mountain Antili- 

26 banus. But the Lord overlooked me, because of you, and 
, would not hearken to me. And the Lord said to me, Let this 

27 suffice thee. Speak no more on this subject. Go up to the 
top of the craggy mountain, and raise thine eyes westward, 
and northward, and southward, and eastward, and take a view 

28 of it with thine eyes ; for thou shalt not cross this Jordan. And 
give a charge to Joshua, and strengthen and encourage him ; 
for he shall cross over before this people, and shall give them 
the possession of all this land which thou hast seen. So we 
halted at the forest, near the house of Phogor. 

IV. Now therefore, hear, Israel, the rules of rectitude, and 
the judgments, which I this day teach you to practise, that you 
may live, and multiply, and go in, and possess the land, which 

2 the Lord the God of your fathers giveth you. You shall not 
add any thing to what I command you ; nor shall you dimi- 
nish from it. You shall keep the commandments of the Lord 

3 our God, which I, this day, give you in charge. Your eyes 
have seen all that the Lord our God did because of Beelphe- 
gor — that as for every man who went after Beelphegor — him 

4 the Lord our God destroyed from among you. But as for you 
who adhered to the Lord your God, you are all alive this day. 

5 Behold, I have taught you rules of rectitude, and judgments, 
as the Lord commanded me ; that you may act agreeably 
thereto, in the land to which you are going, to take possession 

6 of it. Therefore keep them, and practise them. For this will be 
your wisdom, and your understanding, in the sight of all the 
nations. Whoever shall chance to hear all these rules of recti- 
tude, will say, Behold this is a wise and understanding people 



!-!-! IV. DEUTEEONOMY. 

7 — a great nation. For how great must that nation be, which 
hath God near them, as the Lord our God is on all occasions, 

8 if we call upon him ! And how great must the nation be, 
which hath such rules of rectitude, and such righteous judg- 
ments, as are contained in the whole law, which I this day lay- 
before you. 

9 Take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently. For- 
get not all the things which thine eyes have seen, and let them 
not depart from thy heart all the days of thy life ; that thou 
mayst impress upon thy children, and thy childrens' children, 

10 that day when you stood in the presence of the Lord our God 
at Choreb, on the day of the solemn assembly. For the Lord 
said to me, Assemble the people before me, and let them hear 
my words, that they may learn to fear me all the days they 

11 live on the earth. And let them teach their children. So you 
came near and stood at the foot of the mountain. Though the 
mountain was blazing with fire up to heaven, there was dark- 

12 ness, thick darkness, a turbid tempest. And the Lord uttered 
to you, from the midst of the fire, the sound of words which 

13 you heard. You saw no similitude, but only heard a voice. 
And when he had declared to you his covenant, which he 
commanded you to perform, even the ten commandments, he 

14 wrote them on two tables of stone. And the Lord command- 
ed me at that time to teach you rules of rectitude, and judg- 
ments, for you to practise in the land to which you are going, 

15 to take possession of it. Therefore watch your souls with dili- 
gence ; for you saw no similitude on the day when the Lord 
spoke to you at Choreb, in the mount, out of the midst of the 

16 fire ; that you may not transgress, and make for yourselves 
a graven image — any kind of image, the likeness of man or 

17 woman ; the likeness of any of the beasts which are on the 
earth ; the likeness of any winged bird, which flieth in the air ; 

18 the likeness of any reptile, which creepeth on the ground ; the 
likeness of any fish which is in the waters below the earth ; 

19 and that upon looking up to heaven, and seeing the sun, and 
the moon, and the stars, and all the host of heaven, thou mayst 
not be led astray, and worship them, and perform religious ser- 
vice to those things which the Lord thy God hath arranged in 

20 due order, for all the nations which are under heaven. God hath 



!-!-! IV. DEUTERONOMY. 

indeed taken you and brought you out of the land of Egypt — 
out of the iron furnace — out of Egypt, to be to him a chosen 

21 people, as at this day ; but with me the Lord God was angry for 
the things spoken by you, and he solemnly said that I should 
not cross this Jordan, and that I should not enter that land, 

22 which the Lord thy God giveth thee for a possession. For I 
am to die in this land, and not to cross that Jordan ; but you 

23 are to cross it. When you shall possess that good land, take 
heed to yourselves, that you do not forget the covenant of the 
Lord our God, which he made with you, and transgress and 
make for yourselves a graven image of any of the things about 

24 which the Lord thy God hath given thee a charge ; for the 

25 Lord thy God is a consuming fire — a zealous God. If there- 
fore, when you have begotten sons, and sons' sons, and have 
been long in the land, you transgress, and make a graven image 
— the likeness of any thing whatever, and do evil in the sight of 

26 the Lord your God, to provoke him to wrath, I call heaven and 
earth this day to witness against you, that you shall surely pe- 
rish from the land, to which you are going, to cross the Jordan 
there to take possession of it. You shall not prolong your days 

27 therein, but shall be utterly rooted out. And the Lord will scatter 
you among all the nations, and you shall be left few in number, 

28 among all the nations, to which the Lord will bring you. And 
there you shall serve other gods, the works of men's hands, 
stocks and stones, which can neither see, nor hear, nor eat, 

29 nor smell. Y'et there, on seeking the Lord your God you will 
find him, when you seek him with your whole heart and with 

30 your whole soul — In thy affliction, when all these things have 
come upon thee in the latter days, when thou shalt turn to the 
Lord thy God, and hearken to his voice ; because the Lord 

31 thy God is a merciful God ; he will not forsake thee utterly, 
nor totally destroy thee. He will not forget the covenant of 
thy fathers, which the Lord confirmed to them with an oath. 

32 Enquire of the days which are past — those which were be- 
fore thee, from the day God created man on the earth, and 
from one end of heaven to the other; hath there ever been 

33 any thing like this great thing ? Hath any thing been heard 
like it ? Hath any nation heard the voice of the living God, 
speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and 



!-!-! IV. DEUTERONOMY. 

34 are still alive ? Or hath God come, and made trial to take for 
himself a nation out of the midst of a nation, by trials, and by 
signs, and by wonders, and by war, and with a strong hand, 
and an outstretched arm, and with great visions, according to 
all that the Lord our God hath done in Egypt, before thine 

35 eyes ? So that thou must needs know that the Lord thy God is 

36 very God, and that there is none else besides him. From 
heaven he caused his voice to be heard to instruct thee ; and 
on earth he shewed thee his great fire. And thou hast heard his 

37 words out of the midst of the fire. Because he loved thy fa- 
thers, he chose you their seed after them ; and by his mighty 

38 power he hath brought thee out of Egypt, to destroy nations 
greater and mightier than thou art, before thee — to bring thee 
in, and give thee their land for a possession, as is the case with 

39 thee this day. Know therefore this day, and revolve it in thy 
mind, that the Lord thy God is alone God, in the heaven 
above, and in the earth beneath, and that there is none other 

40 besides him. You shall therefore keep his commandments, 
and his rules of rectitude, which I this day give you in charge, 
that it may be well with thee and with thy children after thee 
¦ — that you may live long in the land, which the Lord thy God 
sriveth thee for ever. 

41 Then Moses set apart three cities on the side of Jordan, to- 

42 wards the rising of the sun, for the slayer to flee to. Whoever 
should kill his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in times 

43 past, might flee to one of these cities, and live, namely, Bo- 
sor, in the wilderness, in the plain, for the Eeubenites ; and 
Bamoth, in Galaaditis, for the Gadites; and Gaulon, in Ba- 
san, for the Manassites. 

44 This is the law which Moses laid before the children of 

45 Israel — these are the testimonies, and the rules of rectitude, 
and the judgments, which Moses delivered in his speech to 

46 the Israelites, after they came out of the land of Egypt on 
the bank of the Jordan, in the vale near the house of Phogor, 
in the land of Seon, king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Esebon, 
whom Moses and the Israelites slew after their coming out of 
the land of Egypt, when they took possession both of this 
land, and the land of Og king of Basan, the two kings of the 
Amorites, who were on the side of the Jordan towards the 



!-!-! V. DEUTERONOMY. 

48 rising of the sun, from Aroer, which is on the border of the 

49 brook Arnon, to the mountain of Seon, which is Aermon, 
comprehending all that part of Araba on the eastern bank of 
Jordan, below the cliff of Asedoth. 

V. When Moses had convened all Israel, he said to them> 
Hear, Israel, the rules of rectitude and the judgments, which 
I this day deliver in your hearing, that you may learn them, 
and may be careful to perform them. 

2 The Lord your God made a covenant with you at Choreb. 

3 It was not only with your fathers that the Lord made this co- 
venant, but with you also — with you who are all here alive 

4 this day. Face to face the Lord spoke to you, at that moim- 

5 tain, out of the midst of the fire. I indeed stood between the 
Lord and you, at that time, to declare to you the words of the 
Lord, because you were terrified at the fire, and did not go 

6 up to the mountain ; and he said, I am the Lord thy God, who 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bon- 

7 dage. Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt 

8 not make for thyself an idol, nor the likeness of any thing in 
the heaven above, or of any of the things which are on the earth 

9 below, or which are in the waters below the earth. Thou shalt 
not worship them, nor serve them ; for I am the Lord thy God, 
a zealous God, retributing, to them who hate me, the sins of fa- 
thers upon children, to the third and fourth generation, and 

10 shewing mercy for thousands [of generations] to them who 

11 love me, and keep my commandments. Thou shalt not take 
the name of the Lord thy God in vain ; for the Lord thy God 

12 will not purify him who taketh his name in vain. Keep the day 
of the sabbaths to hallow it, as the Lord thy God hath coni- 

13 manded thee. Labour six days, and do all thy works ; but on 

14 the seventh day are the sabbaths for the Lord thy God. On it 
thou shalt not do any work — neither thou nor thy son, nor 
thy daughter, nor thy man servant nor thy maid servant, nor 
thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor the proselyte 
who sojourneth with thee ; that thy man servant, and thy maid 

15 servant, and thy labouring beast may rest as well as thou. Re- 
member that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that 
the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, with a strong 
hand and an outstretched arm ; for this cause the Lord thy 

vol. I. q q 



Ch V. DEUTEEONOMY. 

God hath commanded thee to keep the day of the sabbaths 

16 and hallow it. Honour thy father and thy mother, as the Lord 
thy God hath commanded thee, that it may be well with thee, 
and that thou mayst live long in the land which the Lord thy 

17 God giveth thee. Thou shalt not commit murder. Thou 
shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt 

21 not bear false witness against thy neighbour. Thou shalt not 
covet thy neighbour's wife; thou shalt not covet thy neigh- 
bour's house, nor his field, nor his man servant, nor his maid 
servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any of his cattle, nor any 
thing which is thy neighbour's. 

22 These are the injunctions which the Lord delivered ver- 
bally, to all your congregation, at the mount, out of the midst 
of the fire. There was darkness, thick darkness, a turbid tem- 
pest, and a loud voice. And he added no more. And having 
written them on two tables of stone, he gave them to me. 

23 Now when you heard the voice from the midst of the fire (the 
mountain indeed was burning with fire) you came to me, even 

24 all the leaders of your tribes, and your elders, and said, Behold 
the Lord our God hath shewn us his glory, and we have heard 
his voice from the midst of the fire. We have this day seen 

25 that God can speak to man, and he may live. Now therefore 
let us not die, for this great fire will consume us, if we conti- 
nue any longer to hear the voice of the Lord our God ; and we 

26 shall die. For what mortal, who hath heard the voice of the 
living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, 

27 can live. Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God 
may say, and thou shalt rehearse to us all that the Lord our 

28 God may speak to thee, and we will hear and do it. And the 
Lord heard the sound of your words when you spoke to me. 
And the Lord said to me, I have heard the sound of the words 
of this people, even all that they have spoken to thee. All that 

29 they have said is right. that they may have their heart so dis- 
posed in them as to fear me, and to keep my commandments 
continually, that it may be well with them, and their children 

30 for ever. Go say to them, Keturn to your houses. But as for 

31 thee, Stand thou here with me, and I will speak to thee all 
the commandments, and the rules of rectitude, and the judg- 
ments, which thou shalt teach them ; and let them act accord- 



!-!-! VI. DEUTEKONOMY. 

32 ingly in the land which I give them for a possession. Be care- 
ful therefore to do as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee. 

33 Turn not aside to the right, nor to the left, from walking in all 
the way which the Lord thy God hath commanded thee, that 
he may give thee rest, and that it may be well with thee, and 
that you may live long in the land, of which you shall take pos- 
session. 

VI. Now these are the commandments, and the rules of rec- 
titude, and the judgments, which the Lord our God command- 
ed you to be taught, that you may act conformably thereto in 
the land to which you are going, there to take possession of it ; 

2 that you may fear the Lord your God. You shall keep all his 
statutes, and his commandments, which I this day command 
you, both thou, and thy children, and thy children's children, 

3 all the days of thy life, that you may live many clays. There- 
fore hear, Israel, and be careful to perform ; that it may be 
well with thee, and that you may be greatly multiplied, as the 
Lord, the God of thy fathers, hath promised to give thee a 
land flowing with milk and honey. These indeed are the rules 
of rectitude, and the judgments, which the Lord gave in charge 
to the children of Israel, in the wilderness, on their coming- 
out of the land of Egypt. 

I Hear Israel ! The Lord is our God. The Lord is one. And 

5 thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole understanding, 

6 and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole might. And these 
injunctions, which I this day give thee in charge, shall be in thy 

7 heart, and in thy soul ; and thou shalt impress them on thy 
children, and speak of them, when thou sittest at home, and 
when thou art walking abroad, and when thou liest down, and 

8 when thou risest up ; and thou shalt bind them for a sign on 
thy right hand, and it shall be immoveably before thine eyes. 

9 You shall also Avrite them on the posts of your houses and 

10 gates. And when the Lord thy God hath brought thee into 
the land, which, with an oath he promised to thy fathers, to 
Abraham, and Isaak, and Jacob, to give thee cities, great and 

11 beautiful, which thou hast not builded — houses full of all good 
things, which thou hast not filled ; cisterns of hewn stone, 
which thou hast not hewed ; vineyards, and olive yards which 



!-!-! VII. DEUTERONOMY. 

thou hast not planted ; and when thou hast eaten, and art filled, 

12 take heed to thyself, that thou forget not the Lord thy God, 
who brought thee out of the land of Egypt — out of the house 

13 of bondage. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him 

14 alone, and cleave to him, and swear by his name. Go not af- 

15 ter other gods — after any of the gods of the nations around 
you. (For the zealous God — the Lord thy God is among you) 
lest the Lord thy God, being provoked to wrath against thee, 

16 destroy thee from the face of the land. Thou shalt not try the 

17 Lord thy God, as you tried him at Temptation. Thou shalt di- 
ligently keep the commandments of the Lord thy God — all 
the testimonies, and the rules of rectitude, which he shall give 

18 thee in charge; and thou shalt do what is well pleasing and 
good in the sight of the Lord thy God, that it may be well 
with thee, and that thou mayst go , in, and take possession of 

19 that good land, out of which the Lord hath, with an oath, pro- 
mised your fathers to drive all thine enemies from before thee, 

20 as the Lord hath spoken. And when thy son shall, in time to 
come, ask thee, saying, What is the meaning of these testi- 
monies, and these rules of rectitude, and these judgments, 

21 which the Lord our God hath enjoined on us? Then thou 
shalt say to thy son, We were servants to Pharao, in the 
land of Egypt, and the Lord brought us out thence, with a 

22 strong hand, and with an outstretched arm. And when the 
Lord had shewn signs, and wonders, great, and grievous, in 

23 Egypt, on Pharao, and on his household, in our sight, he 
brought us out thence, to give us this land, which, with an 

24 oath, he promised to give our fathers ; and the Lord com- 
manded us to practise all these rules — to fear the Lord our 
God, that it may be well with us always, that Ave may live, as 

25 we now do. For we shall find mercy, if we be careful to per- 
form all these commandments in the sight of the Lord our 
God, as he hath commanded us. 

VII. Now when the Lord thy God hath brought thee into that 
land, to which thou art going, there to possess it, and hath re- 
moved from before thee mighty nations — the Chettite, and the 
Gergasite, and the Amorite, and the Chananite, and the Phe- 
resite, and the Evite, and the Jebusite, seven nations, more 
2 numerous, and stronger than you — When the Lord thy God 



!-!-! VII. DEUTERONOMY. 

shall deliver them into thy hands, thou shalt smite them ; thou 
shalt utterly destroy them ; thou shalt not make a covenant with 

3 them. You shall neither shew them mercy, nor contract mar- 
riages with them. Thou shalt not give thy daughter to his son, 

4 nor take his daughter for thy son. For she will cause thy son 
to apostatise from me, and to serve other gods, and the Lord 
will be provoked to wrath against you, and speedily destroy 

5 thee. But in this manner thou shalt deal with them— their al- 
tars you shall destroy ; their pillars you shall break to pieces ; 
their groves you shall cut down ; and the graven images of their 

6 gods you shall burn with fire. For thou art a people dedicated 
to the Lord thy God, and the Lord thy God hath chosen thee, 
to be a peculiar people to himself, in preference to all the na- 

7 tions which are on the face of the earth. It was not because 
you were the most numerous of all the nations, that the Lord 
preferred you, and made choice of you ; for you are the fewest 

8 of all the nations : but because the Lord loved you, therefore 
in performance of the oath which he swore to your fathers, the 
Lord led you out with a strong hand, and the Lord redeemed 
thee from the house of bondage, out of the hand of Pharao 

9 king of Egypt. Know therefore that the Lord thy God is the 
only God — the God to be confided in, who keepeth covenant 
and mercy for thousands of generations with them who love 

10 him, and keep his commandments ; and who requiteth to their 
face them who hate him, so as to destroy them. To them in- 
deed who hate him he will not be slack ; to their face he will 

11 requite them. Therefore keep the commandments, and the 
rules of rectitude, and these judgments, which I this day com- 

12 mand thee to do. And it shall come to pass, that if you hearken 
to these rules, and keep and practise them, the Lord thy God will 
keep with thee the covenant, and the mercy, which he, with an 

13 oath, confirmed to your fathers. And he will love thee, and 
bless thee, and multiply thee ; and he will bless the offspring of 
thy womb, and the product of thy land — thy corn, and thy 
wine, and thine oil, thy herds of cattle, and thy flocks of sheep, 
in the land which he, with an oath, promised thy fathers to give 

14 thee. Thou shalt be blessed above all the nations. There shall 
not be a male without a progeny, nor a female barren among 

15 you, or your cattle. And the Lord will remove from thee every 



Oh. VIII. DEUTEKONOMY. 

malady, and will not lay upon thee any of the sore diseases of 
Egypt, which thou hast seen, which thou hast known : but will 

16 lay them upon all that hate thee. And thou shalt consume all 
the spoils of the nations, which the Lord thy God giveth thee : 

17 Thine eye shall not have pity on them. And thou shalt not per- 
form religious service to their gods ; for this is a snare for thee. 
Now if thou shouldst say in thy heart, This nation is stronger 

18 than I ; how shall I be able to exterminate them ? Be not afraid 
of them ; but keep up a lively remembrance of all that the Lord 

19 thy God did to Pharao, and to all the Egyptians — the great 
trials which thine eyes have seen, — the signs and great won- 
ders — the mighty hand, and the outstretched arm — As the 
Lord thy God brought thee out, so will the Lord your God 

20 deal with all the nations, of whom you are afraid. The Lord 
thy God will indeed send hornets against them, until they who 

21 are left, and hid from thee, are utterly destroyed. Thou shalt 
not be affrighted at them; for the Lord thy God — the Great and 

22 Mighty God, is with thee. The Lord thy God will indeed con- 
sume those nations from before thee, by little and little. Thou 
wilt not be enabled to destroy them at once, lest the land be- 

23 come a waste, and the wild beasts multiply against thee. But 
the Lord thy God will deliver them into thy hands, and thou 
shalt destroy them with a great destruction, until you may ut- 

24 terly exterminate them. When he shall deliver their kings into 
your hands, you shall destroy their name out of that place. 
None shall be able to stand before thee, until thou hast utterly 

25 destroyed them. The graven images of their gods you shall 
burn with fire. Thou shalt not covet the silver nor the gold 
thereof. Thou shalt not take any of it for thyself, lest thou be 

26 ensnared by it. Because it is an abomination to the Lord thy 
God, therefore thou shalt not bring an abomination into thy 
house ; for thou wilt be an Anathema as well as it. Thou shalt 
utterly detest it, and hold it in utter abomination ; for it is an 
Anathema, [a devoted thing.] 

VIII. All the commands which I this day give you in charge 
you shall be careful to perform, that you may live, and be mul- 
tiplied, and go in, and possess the land which the Lord your 
2 God solemnly promised to your fathers ; and thou shalt keep 
in remembrance all the way which the Lord thy God led thee 



!-!-! VIII. DEUTERONOMY. 

in the wilderness, that he might afflict thee, and prove thee, and 
know what was in thy heart, whether thou wouldst keep his 

3 commandments or not. And when he had afflicted thee, and 
suffered thee to hunger, then he fed thee with manna, which 
thy fathers knew not, that he might shew thee, that man can 
live not on bread only ; but that man can live on any thing 

4 which God is pleased to appoint. Thy garments did not be- 
come too old for thee, nor were thy shoes worn out from un- 

5 der thee ; nor the feet galled during the whole forty years ; so 
that thou must know in thy heart, that as a man chastiseth his 

6 son, so the Lord thy God will chasten thee ; keep therefore the 
commandments of the Lord thy God, by walking in his ways, 

7 and fearing him. For the Lord thy God will bring thee to a 
good, and extensive land, where there are brooks of water, and 

8 fountains from the deeps, issuing forth from the plains, and 
from the hills — a land of wheat, and barley, where there are 
vineyards, and fig trees, and pomegranates — a land of oil-olive 

9 and honey — a land wherein thou shalt eat bread, without scar- 
city, and in which thou shalt not want any thing— a land, the 
stones of which are iron, and out of the mountains of which thou 

10 shalt dig brass. Therefore when thou hast eaten, and art satis- 
fied, thou shalt bless the Lord thy God in that good land, which 

11 he hath given thee. Take heed to thyself, that thou forget not 
the Lord thy God, so as not to keep his commandments, and 
his judgments, and his rules of rectitude, which I this day 

12 command thee. When thou hast eaten, and art satisfied, and 

13 hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein, and when thy 
herds, and thy flocks, are multiplied, and thou hast silver and 

14 gold in abundance, and all thy possessions are multiplied, be 
not elated in heart, nor forget the Lord thy God, who brought 
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage— 

15 who conducted you through that great and frightful wilder- 
ness, where there were biting serpents and scorpions, and 
drought, where there was no water — who brought a fountain 

16 of water for thee out of a flinty rock — who fed thee in the wil- 
derness with manna, which thou didst not know, and which 
was not known by thy fathers, that he might afflict thee, and 
try thee, and do thee good in thy latter days. 

17 Say not in thy heart, My own power, and the strength of 



Oh. IX. DEUTERONOMY. 

18 ray own hand bath procured me this great wealth : but remem- 
ber the Lord thy God, that it is he who giveth thee power to 
procure wealth, that he may establish the covenant which the 

19 Lord made with thy fathers, as at this day. Indeed if thou for- 
get the Lord thy God, and go after other gods, and serve them, 
and worship them, I call heaven and earth this day to witness 

20 against you, that you shall surely perish. In like manner as 
the other nations which the Lord God destroyed before you, 
so shall you perish, because you have not hearkened to the 
voice of the Lord your God. 

IX. Hear, Israel ! Thou art now about to cross the Jordan, 
to go in to possess nations much greater and stronger than 

2 you, large cities, which are walled up to the sky, a people 
great and numerous, and of great stature, the children of Enak, 
whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard it said, 

3 Who can stand before the sons of Enak ? Know therefore this 
day, that the Lord thy God will himself march before thee. 
He is a consuming fire. He will destroy them. He will cause 
them to turn back from before thy face, and will destroy them 

4 speedily, as the Lord hath said to thee. Now when the Lord 
thy God hath destroyed those nations from before thee, speak 
not in thy heart, saying, On the account of my righteousness 

5 the Lord hath brought me in to possess this good land. It is 
not on the account of thy righteousness, nor for the sanctity 
of thy heart, that thou goest in to possess their land ; but, be- 
cause of the wickedness of those nations, the Lord will drive 
them out from before thee, and that he may establish his cove- 
nant which the Lord made with our fathers — with Abraham, 

6 and Isaak, and Jacob. Know therefore this day, that it is not 
for thy righteousness that the Lord thy God giveth thee that 
good land for a possession ; for thou art a stiffnecked people. 

7 Remember — never forget how often thou hast provoked to 
wrath the Lord thy God, in the wilderness. From the day you 
came out of Egypt, till your coming to this place, you have 

8 gone on in a course of rebellion against the Lord. At Choreb 
you provoked the Lord, so that the anger of the Lord was kind- 

9 led against you, to destroy you utterly. When I went up the 
mountain to receive the tables of stone — the tables of the co- 
venant which the Lord had made with you. Now I was on 



!-!-! IX. DEUTERONOMY. 

10 the mount forty days, and forty nights ; I neither ate bread nor 
drank water ; and the Lord gave me the two tables of stone, 
written with the finger of God— upon them indeed were writ- 
ten all the words which the Lord had spoken to you at the 

11 mount, on the day of the solemn assembly. And after the for- 
ty days, and the forty nights, when the Lord gave me the two 
tables of stone — the tables of the covenant, the Lord said to 

12 me, Arise, go down quickly from this place : for thy people, 
whom thou hast brought out of Egypt, have transgressed. 
They have gone aside quickly out of the way, to which thou 
diclst enjoin them, and have made for themselves a molten 

13 image. Moreover the Lord spoke to me, saying, I have 

14 spoken to thee once and again and said, I have seen this peo- 
ple, and behold it is a stiffnecked people ; now therefore let 
me utterly destroy them, and blot out their name from under 
heaven ; and I will make thee a nation, great and powerful, and 

15 much more numerous than this. Whereupon I turned, and 
came down from the mount. Now the mount was blazing 
with fire up to heaven, and I had in my two hands the two 

16 tables of the testimonies. And when I saw that you had sin- 
ned before the Lord your G-od, and that you had made for 
yourselves a molten image, and had turned aside from the 
way in which the Lord had commanded you to walk; hav- 

17 ing hold of the two tables, I threw them out of my hands 

18 and broke them before your eyes. Then I made supplication 
before the Lord, a second time, as I had done before, forty 
days and forty nights — (I neither ate bread nor drank wa- 
ter) — for your sins which you had committed by doing evil 

19 in the sight of the Lord God, to provoke him to wrath. Even 
now I tremble on account of the wrath and indignation. For 
the anger of the Lord was kindled against you, to destroy 

20 you utterly. But the Lord hearkened to me at that time also. 
Even against Aaron, his wrath was kindled to destroy him; 

21 But I prayed for Aaron also at that time. Now I had taken 
your sin, the calf which you had made, and burned it with fire ; 
and having stamped, and ground it, till it was very fine, and 
like dust, I threw the dust into the torrent which ran down 

22 out of the mount. At Burning also, and at Temptation, and at 

23 Monuments of longing desire, you provoked the Lord. And 

VOL. i. Rr 



Oh. X. DEUTERONOMY. 

when the Lord sent you from Kades-barne, saying, Go up, 
and take possession of the land which I give you, you dis- 
obeyed the command of the Lord your God, and did not con- 

24 fide in him, nor hearken to his voice. You have been disobe- 
dient to the commands of the Lord, from the day he made 
himself known to you. 

25 When I was making supplication before the Lord, forty 

26 days, and forty nights, as I had done before (for the Lord spoke 
of destroying you utterly,) I prayed to God, and said, O Lord, 
thou king of all the gods, destroy not thy people, and thy he- 
ritage, whom thou hast redeemed, whom thou hast brought 
out of the land of Egypt, with thy mighty power, and with thy 

27 strong hand, and with thine outstretched arm. Remember 
Abraham, and Isaak, and Jacob, thy servants, to whom thou 
didst swear by thyself. Look not upon the stubbornness of 

28 this people, nor upon their wickedness, and their sins, lest 
they who dwell in the land, out of which thou hast brought 
them, should speak, saying, Because the Lord was not able to 
bring them into the land which he promised them ; and be- 
cause he hated them, he led them out into the wilderness to kill 

29 them. Now these are thy people, and thy inheritance, whom 
thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt, with thy mighty 
power, and with thy strong hand, and with thine outstretched 
arm. 

X. At that time the Lord said to me, Hew thee out two ta- 
bles of stone like the first, and come up to me on the mount ; 

2 and thou shalt make thee an ark of wood, and thou shalt write 
on these tables the words which were on the first tables, which 

3 thou didst break, and shalt put them in the ark. So when I 
had made an ark of incorruptible wood, and hewed two tables 
of stone, like the first, and had gone up the mount with the 

4 two tables in my hand ; and he had written on these tables, 
according to the former writing, the ten commandments, 
which the Lord spoke to you at the mount, out of the midst 

5 of the fire ; and the Lord had given them to me, and I had 
turned, and come down from the mount, and had put these ta- 
bles in the ark which I had made, and they were there as the 

6 Lord commanded me, then the children of Israel removed out 
of Beroth, the country belonging to the children of Jakin, into 



!-!-! XI. DEUTERONOMY. 

Misidai, the country where Aaron died, and where he was bu- 
ried, and Eleazar executed the office of priest in his stead. 

7 Thence they removed to G-adgad, and from Gadgad to Etaba- 

8 tha, a land abounding with streams of water. Now the Lord, 
having at that time set apart the tribe of Levi to carry the ark 
of the covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord, and to 

9 serve, and bless in his name, as they do at this day, for this 
cause the Levites have no portion or lot among their brethren. 
The Lord is their portion, as he said to them. 

10 When I had been on the mount forty days, and forty 
nights, the Lord hearkened to me at that time also, for the 
Lord was not willing to destroy you utterly ; and the Lord 

11 said to me, Go, march before this people, and let them go in, 
and take possession of the land which I solemnly promised 

12 their fathers to give them. Now therefore, Israel, what doth 
the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy 
God, and to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve 
the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole 

13 soul — to keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, and 
his rules of rectitude, which I this day command thee, that it 

14 may be well with thee ? Behold the heaven, and the heaven of 
heavens, belong to the Lord thy God, the earth also, and all 

15 that are therein. Nevertheless the Lord made choice of your 
fathers to love them ; and he chose you, their seed, after them, 

16 in preference to all the nations, as at this day. Circumcise 
therefore the stubbornness of your hearts, and be no more stiff- 
necked. For the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of 

17 lords — the God, great, and mighty, and awful. He respect- 

18 eth not persons, nor taketh a bribe. He administereth justice 
to the stranger, and the orphan, and the widow, and loveth the 

19 stranger, in giving him food and raiment. Love ye therefore 
the stranger, for you were strangers in the land of Egypt. 

20 Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and cleave 

21 to him, and swear by his name. He is thy boast ; and he is 
thy God, who hath done for thee those great, and those mar- 

22 vellous things which thine eyes have seen. With seventy souls 
thy fathers went down to Egypt, and now the Lord thy God 

XL hath made thee like the stars of heaven for multitude. There- 
fore thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keep his charges, 



!-!-! XL DEUTERONOMY. 

and his rules of rectitude, and his commandments, and his 

2 judgments, continually. You must now know, for I am not 
addressing your children, who have not known, nor seen, the 
chastisement of the Lord thy God, and his great acts, and his 

3 outstretched arm, and his signs, and his wonders, which he 
did in the midst of Egypt, to Pharao, king of Egypt, and to 

4 all his land ; and what he did to the army of the Egyptians — 
to their chariots, and their cavalry, and their host — how the 
Lord caused the water of the Red sea to overwhelm them, 
when they were pursuing you, and destroyed them even to this 

5 day : and what he did to you in the wilderness, until you 

6 came to this place ; and what he did to Dathan and Abiron, 
the sons of Eliab, son of Reuben, whom the earth, opening 
its mouth, swallowed up, with their houses, and their tents, 
and all their substance with them, in the midst of all Israel. 

7 Because your eyes have seen all these great acts of the Lord 

8 which he hath done among you ; therefore you shall keep all 
his commandments which I this day give thee in charge, that 
you may live, and multiply, and go in, and possess that land to 
which you are going to cross the Jordan, there to take posses- 

9 sion of it — that you may prolong your days in that land, which 
the Lord, with an oath to your fathers, promised to give to 
them, and to their seed after them — a land flowing with milk 

10 and honey. For the land to which you are going, to take pos- 
session of it, is not like the land of Egypt, from which you 
came out, where, when they have sown the seed, they can 

11 water it with their feet, like a garden of herbs. But the land to 
which you are going, to take possession of it, is a land of hills 
and dales, which drinketh up water from the rain of heaven — 

12 a land over which the Lord thy God keepeth a continual 
watch. The eyes of the Lord thy God are upon it, from the 

13 beginning of the year to the end thereof. And if you will 
hearken diligently to all the commands which I this day com- 
mand thee, to love the Lord thy God, and to serve him with 
thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, he will give rain 

14 for thy land in due season — the former and the latter rain ; 
and thou shalt gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. 

15 He will also give grass in thy fields for thy cattle. 

16 But when thou hast eaten, and art full, take heed to thyself 



!-!-! XL DEUTERONOMY. 

that thy heart be not elated ; and that you do not transgress, 

17 and serve other gods, and worship them, lest the Lord, being 
provoked to wrath against you, shut up heaven, so that there 
shall be no rain, and the land yield not its products, and ye 
quickly perish from that good land, which the Lord hath given 

18 you. Therefore lay up these things in your heart, and in your 
soul, and bind them for a sign on your hand, that they may be 

19 immoveably before your eyes. And you shall teach them to 
your children, by speaking of them, when thou sittest at home, 
and when thou walkest abroad, and when thou liest down to 

20 sleep, and when thou risest up. And you shall write them on 

21 the door posts of your houses, and of your gates ; that you 
may prolong your lives, that the days of your children in the 
land which the Lord solemnly promised your fathers to give 

22 them, may be as the days of heaven over the earth. For it shall 
come to pass, that if you hearken diligently to all these com- 
mands, which I this day enjoin you to do — to love the Lord 

23 our God, and to walk in all his ways, and to cleave to him, the 
Lord will drive out all those nations from before you, and you 
shall possess nations much greater and stronger than you. 

24 Every place on which you shall imprint the track of your feet 
shall; be yours, from the wilderness to Antilibanus, and from 

25 the river, the great river Euphrates, to the western sea. These 
shall be your boundaries. None shall be able to stand before 
you. For the Lord your God will impress the fear of you, and 
the dread of you, on the face of all the land on which you shall 
tread, as the Lord hath said to you. 

26 Behold I am going to lay before you this day the blessing 

27 and the curse — the^blessing, if you will hearken to the com- 
mandments of the Lord your God, which I this t day command 

28 you — and the curse, if you will not hearken to the command- 
ments of the Lord our God, in all respects, as I this day com- 
mand you ; but turn aside out of the way to which I have en- 
joined you, and go to serve other gods, which you do not 

29 know. And when the Lord thy God hath brought thee to the 
land, to which thou art going to cross over, there to take pos- 
session of it, thou shalt put the blessing on mount Garazin, 

o0 and the curse on mount Gaibal. Behold are not these on the 
bank of the Jordan, behind the road to the setting of the sun, 



!-!-! XII. DEUTERONOMY. 

in the land of the Chananites, whose dwelling is to the west- 
ward, adjoining Golgol, near the lofty oak ? for you are going 
to cross the Jordan. 

31 When you have gone in, to possess the land which the 
Lord our God giveth you for a perpetual possession, and you 
shall dwell therein, be careful to perform all his command- 
ments, and all these judgments, which I this day lay before you. 

XII. Now these are the commandments, and the judgments, 
which you shall be careful to execute, in the land which the 
Lord the God of your fathers giveth you for a possession, all 
the days you live in the land. 

2 You shall utterly destroy all those places, in which they 
whom you succeed, have worshipped their gods, on the lofty 

3 mountains, and on the hills, and under every shady tree. You 
shall level their mounts, and break in pieces their pillars, and 
cut down their groves, and burn the graven images of their 
gods with fire, so that their name may be destroyed out of 
that place. 

4 You shall not do to the Lord your God, in the manner they 

5 have done ; but you shall seek out and come to the place, 
which the Lord thy God shall make choice of, in one of your 

6 cities, to put his name there, and to be invoked ; and to that 
place you shall bring your whole burnt offerings, and your sa- 
crifices, and your oblations, and your vows, and your free will 
offerings, and your thank offerings, and the firstlings of your 
herds, and flocks ; and you shall eat there before the Lord your 

7 God, and rejoice with your households, for all your possessions, 
and the labours of your hands, as the Lord thy God hath blessed 

8 thee. You shall not do all that we do here at this day ; every 

9 one what is agreeable in his own sight ; for till now you have 
not come to the rest, and to the inheritance which the Lord 

10 your God giveth you : but when you cross the Jordan, and 
dwell in the land which the Lord our God giveth you for a 
possession — when he shall give you rest from all your enemies 
round about, and you shall dwell in safety, then there shall be 

11a place, wherever the Lord thy God shall chuse, for his name 
to be invoked. To that place you shall bring all that I this day 
command you, your whole burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, 
and your tenths, and the oblations of your hands, and the choice 



!-!-! XII. DEUTEKONOMY. 

12 of all your gifts which you may vow to the Lord your G-od ; and 
you shall rejoice before the Lord your God, you, and your 
sons, and your daughters, and your men servants, and your 
maid servants, and the Levite who is at your gates, because he 

13 hath no portion nor inheritance with you. Take heed to thy- 
self, that thou offer not thy whole burnt offerings in every place 

14 which thou mayst see ; but only in the place which the Lord 
thy God shall make choice of, in one of thy tribes. There you 
shall offer your whole burnt offerings, and there you shall do 

15 all that I this day command you. Nevertheless, to satisfy thy 
desire, thou mayst kill and eat flesh, in every city, according 
to the blessing of the Lord thy God, which he hath given thee. 
The unclean with thee, and the clean, may eat it together, as 
you now do a roebuck or a deer ; but you must not eat the 

16 blood : that you shall pour on the ground like water. Thou 

17 shall not be at liberty to eat, in thy cities, the tythe of thy corn, 
and of thy wine, and thine oil, nor the firstlings of thy herds, 
and thy flocks, nor any of thy vows, which you shall make, nor 

18 your thank offerings, nor the oblations of thy hands. These 
thou shalt eat no where but before the Lord, in the place which 
the Lord thy God shall chuse for himself; thou, and thy son, 
and thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid servant, and 

19 the stranger who is in thy cities. And when thou shalt rejoice 
before the Lord thy God, for all thy possessions and all the 
labours of thy hand, take heed to thyself, that thou neglect not 

20 the Levite, as long as thou livest in the land. And when the 
Lord thy God hath enlarged thy borders, as he hath said to 
thee, if thou shalt say, I will eat flesh ; if thy soul desireth to 
eat flesh ; thou mayst, to satisfy the longing of thy soul, eat 

21 flesh : and if the place, which the Lord thy God may have cho- 
sen for his name to be invoked, be far from thee, thou mayst 
slay, in the manner I have commanded thee, some of thy herd 
or thy flock, which God hath given thee, and eat in thy cities, 

22 according to the longing of thy soul. As the roebuck and the 
deer is eaten so thou shalt eat it. The unclean and the clean 

23 may alike eat it. But be very cautious not to eat blood. For 

24 his blood is life. Life must not be eaten with the flesh. You 

25 must not eat it. You must pour it out on the ground, like wa- 
ter. Thou shalt not eat it, that it may be well with thee, and 



!-!-! XIII. DEUTERONOMY. 

26 thy children after thee. If thou wouldst do what is good, and 
well pleasing in the sight of the Lord thy God, over and above 
thy hallowed things, if any thou hast ; thou shalt take thy vows, 
and come to the place which the Lord thy God may have cho- 

27 sen for his name to be there invoked, and having offered thy 
whole burnt offerings, thou shalt offer up the flesh at the altar 
of the Lord thy God, and pour out the blood of thy own sacri- 
fices against the base of the altar of the Lord thy God, and eat 
the flesh of these. 

28 Observe and hear, that thou mayst do all the things which 
I command thee, that it may be well with thee, and with thy 
children after thee for ever. 

29 When thou hast done what is well pleasing and good in the 
sight of the Lord thy God ; and when the Lord thy God shall 
have driven out from before thee the nations, to which thou 

30 art going, to take possession of their land, and thou shalt pos- 
sess it, and dwell therein, take heed to thyself that thou seek 
not to follow them after they are driven out from before thee, 
saying, How did these nations sacrifice to their gods ? I will sa- 

31 crifice in like manner. Thou shalt not do so to thy God ; for 
they sacrificed to their gods the abominations of the Lord, which 
he hated ; for they burned their sons, and their daughters, with 
fire, to their gods. 

32 Be careful to do every thing which I this day command 
XIII. you. Thou shalt not add to it, nor diminish from it. If a 

prophet should start up among you, or a dreamer of dreams, 

2 and give thee a sign or a wonder ; and the sign or the wonder 
should come to pass, which he mentioned to thee saying, Let 

3 us go and worship other gods which you do not know ; you 
shall not hearken to the words of that prophet, or of that dream- 
er of dreams ; for the Lord thy God trieth you, to know whe- 
ther you love your God with your whole heart, and with your 

4 whole soul. You shall follow the Lord your God, and fear him, 

5 and hearken to his voice, and cleave to him. And that prophet, 
or that dreamer, shall be put to death ; for he hath spoken to 
lead thee astray from the Lord thy God, who brought thee out 
of the land of Egypt, who redeemed thee from bondage — to 
put thee out of the way in which the Lord thy God commanded 

6 thee to walk. So thou shalt remove evil from among you. And 



!-!-! XIV. DEUTERONOMY. 

if thy brother, the son of thy father, or of thy mother, or thine 
own son, or daughter, or the wife in thy bosom, or a friend 
who is as thine own soul, speak privately to thee saying, Let us 

7 go and serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers 
have known — any of the gods of the nations around you, of 
those near thee, or those far distant from thee, from one end 

8 of the earth to the other ; thou shalt not consent, nor hearken to 
him ; neither shall thine eye pity him, nor shalt thou spare him, 

9 nor conceal him. Thou shalt surely inform against him, and 
thy hands shall be upon him, among the foremost, to kill him, 

10 and afterwards the hands of the whole people. And they shall 
stone him with stones, and he shall be put to death, because 
he sought to make thee apostatise from the Lord thy God, who 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt — out of the house of 

11 bondage. So all Israel will hear, and be afraid, and no more 

12 proceed to do any such wickedness as this among you. And 
if thou shalt hear it said, that in one of the cities, which the 

13 Lord thy God giveth thee to dwell in, there are wicked men 
gone forth among you, who have seduced all the inhabitants of 
their land, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which you 

14 know not ; thou shalt examine, and make inquiry, and search 
diligently : And behold, if the report is evidently true, and 

15 such abomination hath been committed among you ; thou shalt 
surely destroy all the inhabitants of that land, with the slaugh- 
ter of the sword. With an Anathema thou shalt devote to de- 

16 struction, it and all that are in it. And thou shalt collect all the 
spoils of it into the streets thereof, and burn with fire the city, 
and all the spoils thereof, with all the inhabitants, in the sight 

17 of the Lord thy God. And it shall be uninhabited for ever. It 
shall never be rebuilt any more ; nor shall any thing of what is 
devoted to destruction cleave to thy hand, that the Lord may 
turn from the fierceness of his wrath, and shew thee mercy, 
and have compassion on thee, and multiply thee, in the man- 

18 ner he solemnly promised thy fathers, if thou wilt hearken to 
the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments 
which I this day command you — to do what is comely and well 
pleasing in the sight of the Lord thy God. 

XIV. You are the children of the Lord your God ; you shall 
not make a baldness between your eyes for the dead. 
vol. i. s s 



!-!-! XIV. DEUTERONOMY. 

2 Because thou art a people dedicated to the Lord thy God, 
and the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people 
to himself, above all the nations on the face of the earth, you shall 

3 not eat any abomination. These are the beasts which you shall 

4 eat, young beeves, and sheep, and goats, deer and roebucks, and 

5 the pygarg, and oryx, and camelopardal — every beast which 

6 parteth the hoof, dividing it into two distinct hoofs, and which 

7 cheweth the cud ; these among the cattle you may eat. But of 
those which chew the cud, and of those which part not the hoof, 
dividing it into two distinct hoofs, these you shall not eat — the 
camel, and the hairy foot, and the choirogryllus. Because though 
they chew the cud they do not part the hoof, they are unclean 

8 to you — the swine also, because, though it parteth the hoof 
and divideth it into distinct hoofs, yet it doth not chew the 
cud, it is unclean to you. You shall not eat their flesh, nor 

9 touch their dead carcasses. And of all that are in the water, 
these you may eat. You may eat all that have fins and scales. 

10 But all that have not fins and scales, you shall not eat ; they are 

11 unclean to you. Every clean fowl you may eat ; now these are 
they which you shall not eat — the eagle and the ospray, and 
the cormorant, and the vulture, and the kite, and all of its spe- 
cies ; the ostrich, and the owl, and the gull, and the heron, and 
the swan, and the ibis, and cataractes, and the hawk, and all 
of its species ; and the puet, and the night hawk, and the pe- 
lican, and the charadrius, and all of its species ; and the por- 

19 phurion, and the bat. All the creeping things which fly are un- 

20 clean to you. You shall not eat any of them. Every flying 

21 thing, which is clean, you may eat. Every thing which dieth 
of itself you shall not eat. It may be given to the stranger, 
who is in thy cities, and he may eat it, or thou mayst sell it to 
the stranger. 

Because thou art a people dedicated to the Lord thy God, 
thou shalt not boil a lamb in the milk of its dam. 

22 Thou shalt set apart the tenth of all the increase of thy 

23 seed, the product of thy field year after year ; and this thou 
shalt eat in the place which the Lord thy God shall chuse, for 
his name to be there invoked. Thither you shall bring the 
tenths of thy corn, and of thy wine, and thine oil and the first- 
lings of thy kine, and of thy flocks, that thou mayst learn to 



Ck. XV. DEUTERONOMY. 

24 fear the Lord thy God always. But if the way be too long for 
thee, and thou canst not carry them up, because the place is 
far distant from thee, which the Lord thy God hath chosen for 

25 his name to be there invoked ; seeing the Lord thy God hath 
blessed thee, therefore thou shalt sell them for money ; and 
thou shalt take the money in thy hand, and go to the place 

26 which the Lord thy God hath chosen ; and thou shalt give this 
money for whatever thy soul may desire — for cattle, or for sheep, 
or for wine, or strong drink, or for any thing which thy soul 
may desire ; and thou shalt eat there before the Lord thy God, 

27 and rejoice with thy household, and the Levite who is in thy 

28 cities, because he hath no portion nor lot with you. And, at 
the end of three years, thou shalt carry out all the tenth of thy 
products in that year, and lay it up in thy cities, and the Le- 
vite shall come, because he hath no portion nor lot with thee, 
and the proselyte, and the orphan, and the widow, who is in thy 
cities, and they shall eat and be filled, that the Lord thy God 
may bless thee in all the works which thou dost. 

XV. Every seven years thou shalt make a release. And this 

2 is the ordinance touching this release. Thou shalt remit every 
private debt which thy neighbour oweth thee, and shalt not 
demand it of thy brother ; for the release for the Lord thy 

3 God is proclaimed. Of a stranger thou mayst demand what 
may be due to thee from him ; but to a brother thou shalt 
make a release of what he oweth thee, because among you 

4 there is to be none in want; because the Lord thy God will, 
with blessing, bless thee iu the land which the Lord thy God 

5 giveth thee for an inheritance, that you may possess it, if you 
will but hearken to the voice of the Lord your God, to keep, 
and perform, all these commandments which I this day com- 

6 mand you. Because the Lord thy God hath blessed thee in the 
manner he promised thee, therefore thou shalt lend to many 
nations and shalt not borrow, and thou shalt rule over many 

7 nations, and they shall not rule over thee. If then there chance 
to be among you a needy person — one of thy brethren, in one 
of thy cities in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee 
thou shalt not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy 

8 brother who is in want. Thou shalt open thy hands liberally 
to him, and lend him what he is in want of, according to his 



!-!-! XV. DEUTERONOMY. 

9 necessity. Take heed to thyself that there be not a lurking 
thought in thy heart — a wicked suggestion, saying, The se- 
venth year, the year of remission is near at hand. When thou 
shalt look with an evil eye at thy brother who is in want, and 
not give hirn, he will cry to the Lord against thee, and it will 

10 be a great sin in thee. Thou shalt surely give him, and lend 
him freely, what he is in want of, according to his necessity. 
And thou shalt not be grieved at heart when thou givest to 
him ; for on this account the Lord thy God will bless thee in 

11 all thy works, and in all the labours of thy hands. Because thy 
land may never be without some indigent person in it, there- 
fore I give thee a charge to do this thing, saying, Thou shalt 
open thy hands liberally to thy brother who is in want, and to 

12 the needy in thy land. And if thy brother, a Hebrew man, or 
a Hebrew woman, be sold to thee, he shall serve thee six years ; 
and on the seventh thou shalt send him away from thee, free. 

13 And when thou shalt send him away free from thee, thou shalt 

14 not send him away empty. Thou shalt furnish him liberally 
with provision for the journey, from thy flock and from thy 
corn, and thy wine. According as the Lord thy God hath bless- 

15 ed thee, thou shalt give him; and remember that thou wast a 
servant in the land of Egypt, and that thence the Lord thy 
God redeemed thee; therefore I command thee to do this 

16 thing. And if he shall say to thee, I will not go away from 
thee, because he hath loved thee, and thy family, and is well 

17 with thee ; then thou shalt take an awl, and bore his ear against 
the door, and he shall be thy servant forever. And in the same 

18 manner thou shalt treat thy maid servant. It shall not seem 
hard to thee that they are let go free from thee ; for they have 
saved thee the wages of an hireling. He hath served thee 
six years. 

19 When the Lord thy God hath blessed thee in all thou 
doest, every firstling of thy herds, and thy flocks, even all the 

20 males, thou shalt dedicate to the Lord thy God. Thou shalt 
not work a firstling bull, nor shear the firstlings of thy flock. 
Thou shalt eat them before the Lord, year after year, in the 
place which the Lord thy God shall chuse, thou and thy house- 

21 hold. But if any hath a blemish in it — if it be lame, or blind, 
or any way blemished, thou shalt not sacrifice it to the Lord 



!-!-! XVI. DEUTERONOMY. 

22 thy God. In thy cities thou mayst eat it— the unclean with 
thee as well as the clean may eat it, like the roebuck or deer. 

23 But the blood you shall not eat. Thou shalt pour out that on 
the ground, like water. 

XVI. Observe the month of New things, and keep the pass- 
over to the Lord thy God, because in the month of New 
things thou didst come out of the land of Egypt, by night. 

2 And at the passover thou shalt sacrifice to the Lord thy God, 
sheep, and kine, in the place which the Lord thy God shall 

3 chuse for his name to be there invoked. At it thou shalt not 
eat leaven. Seven days, at it, thou shalt eat unleavened bread — 
the bread of affliction, because you came in haste out of Egypt, 
that you may remember the day of your coming out of the 

4 land of Egypt, all the days of your life. No leaven shall be 
seen in all thy borders for seven days, and none of the flesh 
of that which you shall sacrifice on the evening of the first day 

5 shall be left till the morning. Thou shalt not be at liberty to 
keep the passover in any of the cities which the Lord thy God 

6 giveth thee, but only in the place which the Lord thy God 
shall chuse, for his name to be there invoked. Thou shalt kill 
the passover in the evening, at the setting of the sun, in the 

7 season thou didst come out of Egypt. And when thou hast 
cooked, and roasted, and eaten it, in the place which the Lord 
thy God hath chosen, in the morning thou mayst return and 

8 go home. Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread ; and on 
the seventh day shall be the Exod — a festival to the Lord thy 
God. On it thou shalt not do any work, but what is necessary 
for life. 

9 Seven weeks thou shalt number for thyself — from thy first 
beginning to put the sickle to the harvest thou shalt begin to 

10 number the seven weeks. And thou shalt keep the festival of 
weeks, to the Lord thy God, according to the ability of thy 
hand — according to what the Lord thy God may have given 

11 thee. And thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou, 
and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid 
servant, and the Levite, and the stranger, and the orphan, and 
the widow who is among you, in the place which the Lord 

12 thy God shall chuse for his name to be there invoked. And 
thou shalt remember that thou wast a servant in the land of 



!-!-! XVII. DEUTERONOMY. 

Egypt ; therefore thou shalt keep, and perform, these com- 
mandments. 

13 The feast of tabernacles thou shalt keep for thyself seven 

14 days. When thou hast gathered in from thy threshing floor, 
and from thy press, thou shalt rejoice at this thy festival, thou 
and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid 
servant, and the Levite, and the stranger, and the orphan, and 

15 the widow, who is in thy cities. Seven days thou shalt cele- 
brate this festival to the Lord thy God, in the place which the 
Lord thy God hath chosen for himself. So when the Lord thy 

16 God shall bless thee in all thy productions, and in all the works 
of thy hands, and thou shalt be made glad, every male shall, 
three times in the year, appear before the Lord thy God, in the 
place which the Lord shall chuse — at the festival of unleaven- 
ed bread, and at the festival of weeks, and at the festival of ta- 
bernacles. Thou shalt not appear before the Lord thy God 

17 empty handed. Every one of you shall bring according to the 
ability of his hand, according to the blessing of the Lord thy 
God, which he hath given thee. 

18 Thou shalt appoint for thyself judges, and promulgators of 
the law, in the cities which the Lord thy God giveth thee, 
in every tribe. And they shall administer just judgment to the 

19 people. They shall not wrest judgment, nor respect persons, 
nor shall they receive a gift. For gifts blind the eyes of the 

20 wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. Thou shalt pur- 
sue righteously what is right, that you may live, and go in, and 
possess the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. 

21 Thou shalt not plant a grove for thyself, nor make for thy- 
self a wood near the altar of thy God, nor set up for thyself a 
pillar : these are things which the Lord thy God hateth. 

XVII. Thou shalt not sacrifice to the Lord thy God a young 
bull, or a sheep, in which there is a blemish — any defect ; for 
it is an abomination to the Lord thy God. 

2 If there be found in any of thy cities which the Lord thy 
God giveth thee, a man, or a woman, who shall do evil in the 
sight of the Lord thy God, to transgress his covenant, and they 
have gone, and served other gods, and worshipped them, 

3 either the sun, or the moon, or any of the whole host of heaven, 

4 which he hath not commanded thee, and information be given 



!-!-! XVII. DEUTERONOMY. 

thee, and thou hast made strict inquiry, and behold the thing 

5 hath been actually done, and such an abomination hath been 
committed in Israel, thou shalt bring out that man, or that 
woman, and you shall stone them with stones, till they die. 

6 On the testimony of two or three witnesses the guilty person 
shall be put to death ; but shall not be put to death on the 

7 testimony of one witness. And the hand of the witness shall 
be upon him, among the first, to put him to death, and after- 
wards the hands of the people. So thou shalt remove the wick- 
edness from among you. 

8 And if any cause which require th judicial decision — an ac- 
tion of murder, an action of appeal, a case of leprosy, an action 

9 of plaint and denial— any causes which require decision in any 
of your cities, be too difficult for thee, thou shalt arise, and go 
up to the place which the Lord thy God hath chosen, and 
there come to the priests, the Levites, or to the judge, who- 

10 ever he may be in those days, and they shall inquire, and de- 
clare to thee the sentence of judgment, and thou shalt act ac- 
cording to what they declare to thee from the place which the 
Lord thy God hath chosen : and thou shalt be careful to do 

11 according to what is expounded to thee for law. According to 
the law, and according to the sentence of judgment, which 
they tell thee, thou shalt do. Thou shalt not deviate from what 

12 they tell thee, either to the right, or to the left. And if any man 
act presumptuously, so as not to hearken to the priest who 
hath stood to minister to the name of the Lord thy God ; or to 
the judge who may be in those days ; that man shall be put to 

13 death. So thou shalt remove the evil person from among Is- 
rael, and all the people, when they hear, will be struck with 
awe, and no more act presumptuously. 

14 And when thou art come to the land which the Lord thy 
God giveth thee, and hast taken possession of it, and dwelt 
therein, if thou shouldst say, I will set a chief over me, as the 

15 other nations around me do; thou shalt surely set, as chief over 
thee, him whom the Lord thy God shall chuse. Thou shalt ap- 
point one of thy brethren chief over thee. Thou shalt not 
be at liberty to set a stranger over thee, because he is not thy 

1G brother. Because he is not to multiply cavalry for himself, he must 
not even cause his people to go back to Egypt ; in order that 



!-!-! XVIII. DEUTERONOMY. 

he may not multiply his cavalry : the Lord indeed hath said, 

17 You shall not henceforth return that way any more. Neither 
shall he multiply wives to himself ; that his heart may not turn 
aside ; nor shall he greatly multiply for himself silver and gold. 

18 And when he is settled in his government, he shall write for him- 
self this repetition of the law in a book, from that which is in 

19 the custody of the priests, the Levites. And he shall keep it 
by him, and shall read therein all the days of his life, that he 
may learn to fear the Lord thy God, and to keep all these com- 

20 mandments, and execute all these judgments ; that his heart 
may not be lifted up above his brethren — that he may not turn 
aside from these commandments, to the right, or to the left, to 
the end that he and his sons may long enjoy his government 
among the children of Israel. 

XVIII. The priests, the Levites, even the whole tribe of Levi, 
shall have no portion, nor lot, with Israel. The homage offer- 

2 ings of the Lord are their lot. Them they shall eat ; and they 
shall not have a lot of inheritance among their brethren, The 
Lord himself is their lot of inheritance, as he hath said to them. 

3 Now this shall be the priest's due from the people — from them 
who offer sacrifices, whether a young bull, or a sheep, thou 
shalt give to the priest the shoulder, and the cheeks, and the 

4 maw. Thou shalt also give him the dedications of thy corn, 
and thy wine, and thine oil, and the dedications of the fleeces 

5 of thy flock. Because the Lord hath chosen him, out of all thy 
tribes, to stand before the Lord God, to minister and to bless, 

6 in his name ; therefore with regard to him and his sons, among 
the children of Israel, if, out of any one of all these cities of 
the children of Israel where he dwelleth, a Levite cometh, with 

7 all the desire of his soul, to the place which the Lord hath cho- 
sen, that he may minister to the name of the Lord his God, as 

8 all his brethren the Levites do, who attend there before the 
Lord thy God, he shall eat the allotted portion, over and above 
what may come from the sale of his patrimony. 

9 When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy 
God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abomina- 

10 tions of those nations. Let there not be found among you any one 
who purifieth his son, or his daughter, with fire ; or who prac- 
tiseth divinations, or consulteth omens, or augury, or maketh 



!-!-! XIX. DEUTERONOMY. 

11 use of drugs to practise incantation, or a belly speaker, or an 

12 astrologer, or a necromancer ; for every one who practiseth 
such things is an abomination to the Lord thy God ; for, be- 
cause of these abominations, the Lord will root them out from 

13 before you. Thou shalt be complete in the sight of the Lord 

14 thy God. For these nations which thou art about to possess 
will hearken to enchanters and diviners ; but the Lord thy God 

15 hath not permitted thee to do so. The Lord thy God will raise 
up for thee, from among thy brethren, a prophet like me ; to 

1(1 him you shall hearken. According to all that thou didst request 
of the Lord thy God at Choreb, in the day of the solemn as- 
sembly, when you said, Let us no more hear the voice of the 
Lord thy God, and let us no more behold this great fire, lest 

17 we die, the Lord then said to me, They have spoken right in 

18 all that they have said to thee : I will raise up for them, from 
among their brethren, a prophet like thee, and I will put my 
words in his mouth, and he will speak to them as I command 

19 him : and whosoever will not hearken to what that prophet 
shall speak in my name, I will execute vengeance on him. 

20 But the prophet who shall wickedly presume to speak a word 
in my name which I have not commanded him to speak, or 
who shall speak in the name of other gods, that prophet shall 

21 be put to death. Now if thou shalt say in thy heart, How shall 

22 I know the word which the Lord hath not spoken ? When the 
things which that prophet hath spoken in the name of the Lord 
shall not happen, nor come to pass, the Lord hath not spoken 
that word. The prophet hath spoken wickedly. You shall not 
spare him. 

XIX. Now when the Lord thy God hath destroyed the nati- 
ons, whose land thy God giveth thee, and you have taken pos- 

2 session of it, and dwelt in their cities, and in their houses, 
thou shalt set apart for thyself three cities, in the midst of 

3 that thy land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. Make 
straight the way for thee, and divide into three districts, the 
bounds of thy land which the Lord thy God parcelleth out to 
thee : and in each district let there be a place of refuge for the 

4 slayer. And this shall be the ordinance for every slayer who 
may flee thither, and live. Whosoever shall smite his neigh- 

5 bour unawares, and hated him not in times past, for instance 

VOL. I. t t 



Oh XIX. DEUTERONOMY. 

whosoever shall go with his neighbour into the forest to col- 
lect wood, and the hand of him who is cutting the wood with 
an axe being drawn back, the iron shall slip from the helve, and 
accidentally fall on his neighbour, and he die ; such a one shall 

6 flee with speed to one of the cities, and live. Lest the avenger 
of blood pursuing, because his heart is inflamed, should over- 
take him, if the way be too long, and slay him, though he is 

7 not guilty of death, because he hated him not in time past ; for 
this cause I give thee this charge, saying, Thou shalt set apart 

8 three cities for thyself. And when the Lord thy God shall en- 
large thy borders, as he hath sworn to thy fathers, and the 
Lord hath given thee all the land which he promised to give 

9 thy fathers, if thou wilt hearken to do all the commands which 
I this day give thee in charge, to love the Lord thy God, to 

1 walk in all his ways continually ; thou shalt add three cities 
more for thyself, besides these three, so that guiltless blood 
may not be shed in the land which the Lord thy God giveth 

11 thee for a possession. But there must not be among you one 
guilty of blood. If therefore there be among you a man who 
hateth his neighbour, and who shall lie in wait for him, and 
rise up against him, and smite him so that he die, and flee to 

12 one of these cities ; the senate of his city shall send and take 
him thence, and deliver him into the hands of the avenger of 

13 blood, and he shall be put to death. Thine eye shall not spare 
him. So shalt thou purge away guiltless blood from Israel, and 

14 it shall be well with thee. Thou shalt not remove the boun- 
daries of thy neighbour, which thy fathers have settled at the 
distribution of the inheritances, which were given thee to pos- 
sess in the land, which the Lord thy God hath given thee by lot. 

15 One witness shall not be sufficient to testify against a man 
for any iniquity, or any crime, or any sin, which he may com- 
mit. By the mouth of two witnesses, or by the mouth of three 

16 witnesses, every thing shall be established. And if a false wit- 
ness rise up against a man, and accuse him of any crime, the 

17 two men between whom is the controversy, shall stand before 
the Lord, and before the priests, and before the judges, who 

18 may be in those days. And when the judges have made a strict 
examination, if the false witness hath testified falsehoods, and 

19 risen up against his brother ; you shall do to him as he wicked- 



!-!-! XX. DEUTERONOMY. 

]y thought to do to his brother. 80 thou shalt remove the evil 
from among you ; and the rest, when they hear, will be afraid, 
and thenceforth proceed no more to commit such evil among 

20 you. Thine eye shall not pity him ; life for life ; eye for eye ; 
tooth for tooth ; hand for hand ; foot for foot. 

XX. When thou shalt go out to battle against thine enemies, 
and see horsemen, and charioteers, and a people more nume- 
rous than thou art ; be not afraid of them ; for the Lord thy 
God is with thee — he who brought thee up out of the land of 

2 Egypt. And when thou art near coming to battle, the priest 

3 shall approach, and speak to the people, and say to them, Hear, 
O Israel ! Yon are now going to battle against your enemies ; 
let not your heart be discouraged ; fear not, nor be dismayed, 

4 nor turn aside from before them ; for the Lord your God go- 
eth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, and to 

5 save you. Then the scribes shall speak to the people, and say, 
If there be any man who hath built a new house, and hath not 
dedicated it, let him go, and return to his house, lest he die in 

6 the battle, and another man dedicate it. Or is there any man 
who hath planted a vineyard, and hath not been regaled with 
it ; let him go, and return to his family, lest he die in the bat- 

7 tie, and another man be regaled with it. Or is there any man 
who hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her home ; let 
him go, and return to his family, lest he die in the battle, and 

8 another man take her. And the scribes shall further speak to 
the people, and say, Is there any man fearful, and faint hearted ; 
let him go, and return to his family, lest he make the heart of 

9 his brother faint as his own. And when the scribes have done 
speaking to the people, they shall appoint the chiefs of the ar- 

10 my to lead on the people. And when thou art come to a city, 
to fight against it, thou shalt call upon the inhabitants to come 

11 out peaceably. And if they return thee a peaceful answer, and 
open to thee ; all the people who are found therein shall be tri- 

12 butary to thee, and be thy subjects. But if they hearken not to 

13 thee, and make war against thee, thou shalt besiege it, until 

14 the Lord thy God deliver it into thy hands. And when thou 
hast smitten all the males therein with the slaughter of the sword, 
thou shalt take for thyself, besides the women and the children, 
all the cattle, and all spoils that are in the city, and eat all the 



CJi. XXI. DEUTEKONOMY. 

15 prey of thine enemies, which the Lord thy God giveth thee. In 
this manner thou shalt treat all the cities which are at a great 

16 distance from thee, which are not of the cities of those nations 

17 whose land the Lord thy God giveth thee for a possession. Of 
these you shall save none alive that breatheth : but, with an 
Anathema, thou shalt devote to destruction the Chettite and 
the Amorite, and the Chananite, and the Pherezite, and the 
Evite, and the Jebusite, and the Gergasite, as the Lord thy 

18 God hath commanded thee ; that they may not teach you all 
their abominations which they have performed to their gods ; 

19 and that you may not sin before the Lord your God : Now 
when thou shalt sit down before a city, many days, to war 
against it till it be taken, thou shalt not destroy the trees there- 
of by striking an ax against them. That especially, the fruit 
of which thou mayst eat, thou shalt not cut down. Doth any 
man wish to have a tree in the field for the purpose of a rarn- 

20 part for thee ; let it be that only which thou knowest is not a 
fruit bearing tree. This thou mayst destroy and cut down, to 
build ramparts against the city which resisteth thee, until it be 
delivered up. 

XXI. If one be found slain in the land which the Lord thy 

2 God giveth thee to possess — lying in the open field ; and it is 
not known who smote him ; thy senate, and thy judges, shall 
come and measure the distance to the cities around the slain ; 

3 and the senate of the city which is next to the slain, shall take 
a heifer from the herd, which hath never been worked, and 

4 which hath never drawn in a yoke ; and the senate of the city 
shall bring the heifer down to a rugged valley, which hath never 
been tilled, nor sowed, and they shall hamstring the heifer 

5 in the valley. Then the priests, the Levites, shall come near : 
because the Lord God hath chosen them to wait upon him, and 
to bless in his name, therefore by their mouth every cause of 
plaint and denial, as well as all cases of leprosy, are to be de- 

6 cided ; and the whole senate of the city which is nearest the 
person dead, shall wash their hands over the head of the heifer, 

7 which was hamstringed in the valley, and shall answer, and say, 
Our hands have not shed this blood, and our eyes have not 

8 seen it. Be merciful to thy people whom thou, Lord, hast 
redeemed, that there may not be blood shed without cause 



!-!-! XXI. DEUTEKONOMY. 

9 among thy people Israel. So the blood shall be forgiven them, 
and thou shalt remove from among you the blood which was 
shed without cause, if thou do what is good, and well pleasing 
in the sight of the Lord thy God. 

10 And when thou goest out to war against thine enemies, and 

11 the Lord thy God hath delivered them into thy hands, and thou 
hast taken their prey, and hast seen, among the captives, a wo- 

12 man of a comely appearance, and hast loved her, and hast ta- 
ken her to thyself for a wife, and brought her home to thy house, 

13 thou shalt shave her head, and pare her nails, and take from 
her the garments of her captivity, and she shall remain in thy 
house, and bewail her father, and her mother, a full month, 
and after that thou mayst go in unto her, and cohabit with her, 

14 and she shall be thy wife. And in case thou dislike her, thou 
shalt send her away free. She shall not be sold for money. 
Thou shalt not deal falsely with her, because thou hast hum- 
bled her. 

15 If any man hath two wives, and one of them be beloved, 
and the other hated ; and both the beloved, and the hated, bear 

16 him children, and the son of the hated be the first born, he 
shall not be at liberty, when he bequeatheth his substance to 
his children, to give the right of primogeniture to the son of 
the beloved, and overlook the son of the hated, who is the first 

17 born ; but shall acknowledge the son of the hated as his first 
born, by giving him a double portion of all that he hath, be- 
cause he is the head of his children, and the rights of primo- 
geniture belong to him. 

18 If any man hath a stubborn, and rebellious son, who heark- 
eneth not to the voice of his father, nor to the voice of his mo- 
ther ; and they have corrected him, and he will not hearken to 

19 them ; his father and his mother shall take him, and bring him 

20 out to the senate of his city, and to the gate of the place ; and 
they shall say to the men of their city, This our son is stub- 
born and rebellious ; he hearkeneth not to our voice. He is de- 

21 voted to revelling and drunkenness. Thereupon the men of his 
city shall stone him with stones, and he shall be put to death. 
So thou shalt remove the wicked from among you ; and the 
rest, who hear, will be struck with awe. 

22 If any man commit a sin incurring death ; and he be put 



!-!-! XXII. DEUTEKONOMY. 

to death ; and you hang him on a gibbet ; his body shall not 
remain on the gibbet ; but you shall bury it the same day. Be- 
cause every one who is hanged on a gibbet is accursed of God ; 
therefore you shall not defile the land which the Lord thy God 
giveth thee for a possesion. 
XXII. When thou seest thy brother's ox or sheep going astray, 
thou must not overlook them. Thou shalt surely bring them 

2 back to thy brother, and restore them to him. And if thy bro- 
ther be not near thee, and thou dost not know him ; thou shalt 
take them home to thy house ; and they shall be with thee, until 
thy brother seek them ; then thou shalt restore them to thy bro- 

3 ther. In like manner thou shalt do with his ass, and in like 
manner with his raiment, and in like manner with every thing 
which thy brother hath lost. Whatever hath been lost by him, 

4 if thou find it thou must not overlook it. When thou seest thy 
brother's ass, or his ox, fallen in the way, thou must not over- 
look them ; thou shalt help him to lift them up. 

5 A woman shall not wear what appertaineth to man, nor 
shall a man put on a woman's garment ; for every one who 
doth such things is an abomination to the Lord thy God. 

6 If there chance to be before thee in the way, either in a tree, 
or on the ground, a bird's nest, with young or eggs ; and the 
dam be sitting on the young, or on the eggs ; thou shalt not 

7 take the dam with the young. Thou shalt let the dam go ; 
but thou mayst take the young for thyself ; that it may be well 
with thee, and that thou mayst prolong thy days. 

8 When thou buildest a new house, thou shalt make a bat- 
tlement for thy roof, that thou mayst not occasion death by thy 
house, by any one's falling from it. 

9 Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard, when the product of it is 
consecrated, with seed of another kind, that the seed which 

• thou sowest may not be consecrated, with the product of thy 
vineyard. 

10 Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an ass together. 

11 Thou shalt not wear, without scouring, a garment of wool 
and flax in the same piece. 

12 Thou shalt make bunches of ribbons on the four tufts of 
the mantles with which thou clothest thyself. 

13 If any man take a wife, and cohabit with her, and hate her, 



Oh. XXII. DEUTERONOMY. 

14 and spread groundless reports concerning her, and give her an 
ill name, and say, I took this woman to wife, but when I came 

15 to her, I did not find her tokens of virginity ; thereupon the 
father and mother of the damsel taking the tokens of their 
child's virginity, shall carry them to the senate, to the gate. 

16 And the father of the girl shall say to the senate, I gave this 
my daughter to that man for a wife ; but he now hateth her, 
and hath spread groundless reports concerning her, saying, I 

17 found not the tokens of virginity in thy daughter. Now these 
are the proofs of my daughter's virginity. And they shall 

18 spread the garment before the senate of the city. Whereupon 
the senate of the city shall take the man, and chastise him, and 

19 fine him a hundred shekels, and give them to the father of the 
young woman, because he brought an ill name on a virgin of 
Israel ; and she shall be his wife. He shall not be at liberty to 

20 put her away all his days. But if his accusation be founded in 
truth, and proofs of virginity cannot be found for the young 

21 woman, they shall carry out the young woman to the doors of 
her father's house, and stone her with stones, till she die, be- 
cause she hath committed folly in Israel, by making her father's 
house a place of prostitution. So thou shalt remove evil from 
among you. 

22 If a man be found lying with a woman who is married, you 
shall put them both to death ; both the man who lay with the 
woman, and the woman. So shalt thou take away evil from Is- 
rael. 

23 If a virgin be betrothed to a husband ; and a man find her 
in a city, and lie with her, you shall bring them both out to the 

24 gate of the city, and stone them with stones, till they die— the 
young woman, because she did not cry aloud in the city, and 

25 the man because he humbled the wife of his neighbour. So 
thou shalt remove evil from among you. But if the man found 
the woman who was betrothed, in the field, and by force lay 
with her, you shall put him only to death who lay with her. 

26 The young woman is not guilty of death. As when a man 
hath risen up against his neighbour, and killed him, even so is 

27 this matter : for he found her in the field. The young woman 
who was betrothed, cried aloud, but there was none to help her. 

28 If any man find a young woman, who is not betrothed, 



!-!-! XXIII. DEUTERONOMY. 

29 and by force lie with her, and be found, the man who hath lain 
with her shall pay the father of the young woman fifty di- 
drachms of silver, and she shall be his wife : because he hath 
humbled her, he shall not be at liberty to put her away, all the 
days of his life. 

30 A man shall not take his father's wife, nor uncover his fa- 
ther's skirt. 

XXIII. A man who is made a eunuch by bruising, or by cut- 

2 ting, shall not come into the congregation of the Lord; nor 
shall the son of a harlot come into the congregation of the 

3 Lord. An Amorite, and a Moabite, shall not come into the 
congregation of the Lord : even to the tenth generation, they 

4 shall not come into the congregation of the Lord — nay ; even 
for ever ; because they did not meet you with bread and water 
on the way, when you were coming out of Egypt ; and be- 

5 cause they hired against thee, Balaam, son of Beor, of Meso- 
potamia, to curse thee ; but the Lord thy God would not 
hearken to Balaam. Nay, the Lord thy God turned the curses 

6 into a blessing, because the Lord thy God loved thee. Thou 
shalt not propose terms of peace with them, nor what is condu- 

7 cive to their welfare, all thy days, forever. Thou shalt not 
abominate an Idumean; for he is thy brother. Thou shalt 
not hold in abhorrence an Egyptian ; because thou wast a so- 

8 journer in his land. If either of these have sons, they may come 
into the congregation of the Lord, in the third generation. 

9 When thou goest out to encamp against thine enemies, 

10 thou shalt be on thy guard against every evil thing. If there 
be with thee a man who is unclean, by reason of any nightly 
pollution, he shall go out of the camp, or he shall not come 

11 into the camp ; but towards evening he shall wash his body 
with water, and when the sun is set, he may come into the 

12 camp. Moreover thou shalt have a place without the camp, 

13 and thou shalt go out thither. And thou shalt have in thy gir- 
dle a spaddle, and when thou hast eased thyself abroad, thou 

14 shalt dig with it, and cover thy uncleanness. Because the 
Lord thy God walketh about in thy camp, to save thee, and 
subdue thine enemy before thee, therefore thy camp must be 
holy. There must be nothing unseemly seen with thee, that 
he may not turn away from thee. 



!-!-! XXIV. DEUTERONOMY. 

15 Thou shalt not deliver up to his master, a servant who 

16 hath fled to thee, from his master. He shall dwell among you 
wherever he pleaseth. Thou shalt not afflict him. 

17 There shall not be a harlot of the daughters of Israel, nor 
a whoremonger of the sons of Israel. There shall not be a 
prostitute among the daughters of Israel, nor shall any of the 
Israelites be a votary of prostitution. 

18 Thou shalt not bring the hire of an harlot, nor the price of 
a dog, into the house of the Lord, for any vow, for both are an 
abomination to the Lord thy God. 

19 Thou shalt not take interest of thy brother, for money, 
nor for victuals, nor for any thing which thou mayst lend him. 

20 To a stranger thou mayst lend on interest ; but to thy brother 
thou shalt not lend on interest ; that the Lord thy God may 
bless thee in all thy works, in the land to which thou art going 
to take possession of it. 

21 If thou vowest a vow to the Lord thy God, thou shalt not 
delay to pay it ; for the Lord thy God will surely require it of 

22 thee ; and it would be a sin in thee. If thou dost not chuse to 

23 make a vow, it is no sin in thee. Thou must be careful of what 
have proceeded from thy lips ; and offer, in the manner thou 
hast vowed to the Lord thy God, the gift which thou hast pro- 
mised with thy mouth. 

25 If thou comest into thy neighbour's field of standing corn, 
thou mayst gather ears with thy hands ; but thou shalt not put 
a sickle into thy neighbour's field of standing grain. And if 
thou comest into thy neighbour's vineyard, thou mayst eat 
grapes, till thy soul is satisfied, but thou shalt not put any into 
a vessel. 

XXIV. If any one hath taken a wife, and cohabited with her, 
and it should happen that she hath not found favour in his 

2 sight, because he hath found something unseemly in her, he 
may write her a bill of divorce, and put it into her hands, and 

3 send her away from his house. And having gone away, she may 
become another man's wife. But if her last husband hate her, and 
write her a bill of divorce and put it in her hands and send her away 

4 from his house ; or if her last husband, who hath taken her to wife, 
die ; her former husband, who put her away, shall not be at 
liberty to return and take her again to wife ; for it is an abo- 

vol. I. u u 



!-!-! XXIV. DEUTERONOMY. 

mination to the Lord thy God; and you must not defile the 
land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for a possession. 

5 If any man hath lately taken a wife, he shall not go out to 
battle, nor shall he be charged with any business. He shall 
be free at home one year, that he may cheer his wife whom he 
hath taken. 

6 Thou shalt not take in pledge an upper, nor a lower mil- 
stone, for this is taking a man's life in pledge. 

7 If any man be found stealing any of his brethren, the chil- 
dren of Israel, or, having got him in his power, selleth him, 
the thief shall be put to death. So shalt thou remove evil from 
among you. 

8 Take heed to thyself, that in the touch of the leprosy thou 
be very careful to act according to all the law which the priests, 
the Levites, may point out to you. Be careful to do in the man- 

9 ner I commanded you. Eemember what the Lord thy God 
did to Mariam, on the way, as you were coming out of the 
land of Egypt. 

10 If a debt of any kind be due to thee from thy neighbour, 

11 thou shalt not go into his house to take his pledge. Thou shalt 
stand without, and the man who is thy debtor shall bring the 

12 pledge out to thee. And if the man be very poor, thou shalt 

13 not go to sleep with his pledge. Thou shalt surely restore him 
his pledge at the going down of the sun, that he may sleep in 
his garment, and bless thee, and there shall be mercy for thee 
in the sight of the Lord thy God. 

14 Thou shalt not withhold the wages of a poor and needy man, 
whether he be one of thy brethren, or of the strangers who are 

15 in thy cities. Thou shalt pay him his wages on the very day : 
let not the sun set upon it. For he is poor, and dependeth on 
it ; and he will cry to the Lord against thee, and it will be a 
sin in thee. 

16 Fathers shall not be put to death for children ; nor the 
children for fathers. Every man shall be put to death for his 
own sin. 

17 Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, or the 
orphan, or the widow. Thou shalt not take the garment of a 

18 widow in pledge, but remember that thou wast a servant in the 
land of Egypt, and that thence the Lord thy God redeemed 
thee ; therefore I command thee to do this thing. 



!-!-! XXV. DEUTERONOMY. 

19 When thou reapest thy harvest in the field, if thou hast 
forgot a sheaf in thy field, thou shalt not turn back to take it 
up ; it shall be for the stranger, and the orphan, and the widow, 
that the Lord thy God may bless thee, in all the works of thy 

20 hands. And when thou gatherest thine olives, thou shalt not 
turn back to gather what was left behind thee : it shall be for 
the stranger and the orphan and the widow ; and thou shalt re- 
member that thou wast a stranger in the land of Egypt ; there- 

21 fore I command thee to do this thing. And when thou gatherest 
in the vintage, thou shalt not glean after thee. The gleanings 

22 shall be for the stranger, and the orphan, and the widow ; and 
thou shalt remember that thou wast a servant in the land of 
Egypt ; therefore I command thee to do this thing. 

XXV. When a controversy happeneth between men, and 

they have come to a trial, and the trial is over, and the righte- 
ous is acquitted, and the criminal known ; in case the criminal 

2 deserve to be beaten, thou shalt make him lie down, before 
the judges ; and they shall cause him to be beaten, in their pre- 

3 sence, according to his wickedness. With the number of forty 
stripes they may cause him to be beaten. They shall not ex- 
ceed that. If thou shouldst proceed to inflict more stripes than 
these, thy brother will become vile in thy sight. 

4 Thou shalt not muzzle an ox treading out corn. 

5 When brothers dwell together, and one of them die, and 
hath no issue, the wife of him who died shall not marry a man 
abroad, who is not near of kin. The brother of her husband 
shall go in unto her, and take her to wife, and cohabit with her ; 

6 and the child which she shall bear shall go by the name of him 
who died, so that his name shall not be blotted out from among 

7 Israel. And if any man decline to take his brother's wife, the 
woman shall go to the gate, to the senate, and say, My hus- 
band's brother refuseth to raise up his brother's name in Israel. 

8 My husband's brother hath refused. Thereupon the senate of 
his city shall send for him, and say to him, Thou must stand 

9 up, and say, I will not take her. Upon which his brother's wife 
shall come, in the presence of the senate, and loose one shoe 
from his foot, and spit before his face, and addressing him, say, 
So shall be done to the man who will not build up his bro- 



!-!-! XXVI. DEUTERONOMY. 

10 tker's house in Israel. And his name shall be called in Israel, 
The house of him who had his shoe loosed. 

11 When men fight together — a man with his brother, if the 
wife of one of them come to rescue her husband out of the 
hand of him who is beating him, and stretching forth her hand? 

12 take hold of his privities, thou shalt cut off her hand. Thine 
eye shall not have compassion on her. 

13 Thou shalt not have in thy bag different weights, a great 
and a small ; nor shall there be in thy house, different measures, 

1-1 a great and a small. Thou shalt have a just and true weight, 

15 and thou shalt have a just and true measure ; that thy days may 
be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee for a 

16 possession ; for every one who doth these things — every one 
who committeth injustice, is an abomination to the Lord thy 
God. 

17 Remember what Amalek did to thee by the way, when 

18 thou wast coming out of the land of Egypt — how he rose up 
against thee, in the way, and smote thy rear, those who were 

19 fainty behind thee. Thou indeed wast hungry, and fainty, and 
he feared not God. Therefore when the Lord thy God hath 
given thee rest from all thine enemies around thee, in the land 
which the Lord thy God giveth thee for a possession, thou shalt 
blot out the name of Amalek from under heaven. Thou must 
not forget. 

XXYI. Now, when thou art come to the land which the Lord 
thy God giveth thee for a possession, and hast taken possession 

2 of it, and dwelt therein ; thou shalt take some of the first fruits 
of thy land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee, and put them 
in a basket, and go to the place which the Lord thy God hath 

3 chosen for his name to be there invoked ; and thou shalt go 
to the priest, who shall be in those days, and say to him, I ac- 
knowledge this day to the Lord my God, that I am come to 
the land which the Lord solemnly promised our fathers to give 

4 us. Thereupon the priest shall take the basket out of thy hands, 
and set it down over against the altar of the Lord thy God, 

5 and in the presence of the Lord shall answer, and say, My fa- 
ther left Syria, and went down into Egypt, and sojourned there, 
with a small number, and became there a great nation, and a 

6 vast multitude. And when the Egyptians afflicted us, and hum- 



!-!-! XXVI. DEUTERONOMY. 

bled us, and imposed upon us hard labours, and we cried to 

7 the Lord our God, the Lord heard our voice. When he saw 
our affliction, and our labour, and our oppression, the Lord 

8 himself brought us out of Egypt with his great power, and 
with his strong hand, and outstretched arm, and with great vi- 

9 sions, and with signs, and with wonders, and brought us to 
this place, and gave us this land — a land flowing with milk and 

10 honey. Now therefore, behold, I have brought this offering of 
the products of the land, which thou, Lord, hast given me — 
a land flowing with milk and honey. Then thou shalt leave it 
before the Lord thy God ; and when thou hast worshipped be- 
ll fore the Lord thy God, thou shalt regale thyself with all the 
good things which the Lord thy God hath given thee, thou, 
and thy family, and the Levite, and the proselyte who is with 
thee. 

12 And when thou hast finished ty thing the tenth of all thy 
produce in the third year, thou shalt give another tenth to the 
Levite, and the proselyte, and the orphan, and the widow, that 

13 they may eat in thy cities, and be regaled. Then thou shalt say 
before the Lord thy God, I have removed the hallowed things 
clean out of my house, and have given them to the Levite, and 
the proselyte, and the orphan, and the widow, according to all 

14 the commands which thou hast commanded me. I have not 
transgressed thy command, nor forgot it. I have not, in my 
mourning, eaten any of them, nor offered any of them in ho- 
mage to an unclean thing, nor given any of them to the dead. 
I have hearkened to the voice of the Lord our God. I have 

15 done as thou hast commanded me. Look down from thy holy 
habitation — from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and this 
land which thou hast given them, as thou clidst solemnly pro- 
mise our fathers to give us a land flowing with milk and honey. 

16 This day the Lord thy God hath commanded thee to prac- 
tise all these rules of rectitude and these judgments ; you shall 
therefore keep, and perform them, with your whole heart, and 

17 with your whole soul. Thou hast this day chosen God to be 
thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his rules of recti- 

18 tude, and his judgments, and to hearken to his voice. And the 
Lord hath this day chosen thee to be a peculiar people to him- 
self, as he hath said, that thou mayst keep his commandments, 



XXVII. DEUTEKONOMY. 

and be, as he hath made thee, renowned above all the nations, 
19 and a boast, and glorious, and that thou mayst be a people de- 
dicated to the Lord, as he hath spoken. 
XXVII. Again Moses, with the senate of Israel, gave a charge, 
saying, You shall keep all these commandments which I this 
day command you. 

2 When you have crossed the Jordan, into the land which 
the Lord thy God giveth thee ; thou shalt set up for thyself 
large stones, and plaister them with mortar, and thou shalt 

3 write on those stones all the words of this law. Soon as you 
have crossed the Jordan — when you are come to the land 
which the Lord the God of thy fathers giveth thee — a land 
flowing with milk and honey, as the Lord the God of thy fa- 

4 thers promised thee, you shall, immediately after your cross- 
ing the Jordan, set up these stones, which I this day command 
thee, at mount Garizin, and thou shalt plaister them with mor- 

5 tar, and build there an altar to the Lord thy God — an altar of 

6 stones. Thou shalt not lift up a tool upon it. Of unwrought 
stones thou shalt build the altar to the Lord thy God, and of- 

7 fer upon it whole burnt offerings to the Lord thy God. Then 
thou shalt offer there a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and when thou 

8 hast eaten, and art filled, and hast rejoiced before the Lord 
thy God ; then thou shalt write upon the stones all this law, in 
the plainest manner. 

9 Then Moses with the priests, the Levites, spoke to all Is- 
rael, saying, 

10 Be silent and hear, O Israel. Thou art this day made a 
people for the Lord thy God ; therefore thou shalt hearken to 
the voice of the Lord thy Gocl, and perform all his command- 
ments, and his rules of rectitude, which I this day com- 

11 mand thee. Then Moses gave a charge to the people that day, 
saying, Having crossed the Jordan, these shall stand on mount 

12 Garizin to bless the people — Symeon, Levi, Judas, Issachar, 

13 Joseph, and Benjamin. And these shall stand at the curse on 
mount Gaibal, Keuben, Gad, and Aser, Zabulon, Dan, and 

14 Nephthaleim : and the Levites shall address all Israel, and say 
with a loud voice, 

15 Cursed the man who shall make a graven, or molten image, 
an abomination to the Lord, the work of the hands of artists ; 



!-!-! XXVIII. DEUTEKONOMY. 

though he set it up iu a secret place. And all the people shall 
answer and say, Amen. 

16 Cursed he who slighteth his father or his mother. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

17 Cursed he who remove th his neighbour's land mark. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

18 Cursed he who leadeth the blind out of the way. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

19 Cursed he who perverteth the judgment of the stranger, or 
the orphan, or the widow. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

20 Cursed he who lieth with his father's wife, because he hath 
uncovered his father's skirt. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

21 Cursed he who lieth with any beast. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

22 Cursed he who lieth with his sister, by the same father, or 
mother. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

23 Cursed he who lieth with his daughter in law. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

24 Cursed he who lieth with the sister of his wife. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

25 Cursed he who smiteth his neighbour secretly. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

26 Cursed he who taketh bribes to slay an innocent person. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 

27 Cursed be every man who will not persevere in all the 
words of this law, to do them. 

And all the people shall say, Amen. 
XXVIII. Now it shall come to pass, that if thou wilt hearken 
diligently to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep and per- 
form all these commandments which I this day give thee in 
charge, the Lord thy God will set thee high above all the na- 
tions of the earth ; and all these blessings shall come upon thee, 
and find thee. 

2 If thou wilt hearken diligently to the voice of the Lord thy 

3 God, Blessed shalt thou be in the city ; and blessed shalt thou 

4 be in the held ; blessed shall be the fruit of thy budy, and the 



Oh. XXVIII. DEUTERONOMY. 

5 products of thy land, and thy herds, and thy flocks. Blessed 
shall be thy granaries, and thy stores. 

6 Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed 

7 when thou goest out. May the Lord thy God deliver up thine 
enemies, who rise up against thee, to be smitten before thee. 
They shall come out against thee one way, and flee before 
thee seven ways. 

8 The Lord send upon thee the blessing in thy store houses, 
and on all the labours of thy hands, in the land which the Lord 
thy God giveth thee. 

9 The Lord establish thee a holy people for himself, as he 
solemnly promised thy fathers. If thou wilt hearken to the 

10 voice of the Lord thy God, and walk in all his ways, then shall 
all the nations of the earth see that thou art called by the name 

11 of the Lord, and they will be afraid of thee ; and the Lord thy 
God will multiply thee, for good, in the offspring of thy body, 
and in the increase of thy cattle, and in the products of thy 
ground, in the land which he solemnly promised thy fathers to 
give thee. 

12 The Lord open for thee his good treasury, the heaven, to 
give thy land the rain in due season. May he bless all the works 
of thy hands, so that thou mayst lend to many nations, and 

13 not borrow of them ; and that thou mayst rule over many na- 
tions, and they not rule over thee. May the Lord establish thee 
for a head and not for a tail, so that thou mayst be above, and 
not beneath. 

If thou wilt hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to 
keep all that I this day enjoin thee, thou wilt not turn aside from 

14 all the commandments which I this day command thee, either to 
the right, or to the left, to go after other gods, to serve them. 

15 But in case thou wilt not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy 
God to keep all his commandments which I this day give thee 
in charge, all these evils shall come upon thee and overtake 
thee — 

16 Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed thou in the 

17 field. Cursed shall be thy granaries, and thy stores. Cursed 

18 shall be the offspring of thy body, and the products of thy land, 

19 thy herds and thy flocks. Cursed shalt thou be when thou 

20 comest in, and cursed thou when thou goest out. The Lord 



!-!-! XXVIII. DEUTERONOMY. 

send upon thee want, and famine, and destruction on all the 
labour of thy hands, until he utterly root thee out, and until 
he destroy thee quickly, on the account of thy wicked devices. 

21 Seeing thou hast forsaken me, may the Lord make the pesti- 
lence cleave to thee, until it utterly consume thee from the land 

22 to which thou art going, to take possession of it. The Lord 
smite thee with anxiety, and fever, and chilness, and restless- 
ness, and blasting, and mildew, that they may pursue thee un- 

23 til they utterly destroy thee. And when the heaven over thy 
head shall be brass, and the earth under thy feet iron, may the 

24 Lord thy God make the rain of thy land dust, so that dust 
from heaven may descend until it waste thee, and until it de- 

25 stroy thee speedily. May the Lord deliver thee up to slaugh- 
ter before thine enemies, so that thou mayst go out one way to 

26 meet them, and flee seven ways from before them ; and be a 
dispersion among all the kingdoms of the earth ; and your dead 
carcasses be food for the birds of the air, and the wild beasts of 

27 the earth, and there be none to fray them away. The Lord 
smite thee with the Egyptian boil in thy seat, and with 
wild fire, and with itching, so that thou canst not be cured. 

28 The Lord smite thee with madness, and blindness, and as- 

29 tonishment of heart, so that thou mayst grope about at noon 
day, as a blind man gropeth in darkness ; and let him not pros- 
per thy ways, so thou shalt then be injured, and spoiled conti- 

30 nually, and there will be none to help thee. Thou wilt take a 
wife, and another man shall have her. Thou wilt build a house, 
but shall not dwell therein. Thou wilt plant a vineyard, but 

31 shalt not gather the grapes thereof. Thy ox will be slaughtered 
before thy face, and thou shalt not eat thereof. Thy ass will 
be taken from thee, and shall not be restored ; thy flocks will 
be given to thine enemies, and there shall be none to help 

32 thee; thy sons, and thy daughters, will be given to another 
nation, and thine eyes will melt in looking at them; there will 

33 be no strength in thy hand. A nation, which thou knowest not 
will eat the fruits of thy land, and all thy labours ; and thou 

34 shalt be injured, and oppressed continually, and driven to mad- 
ness at the sight of thine eyes, which thou shalt see. 

35 The Lord smite thee with a grievous boil on thy knees, 
and on thy legs, so that thou canst not be healed, from the sole 

VOL. I. xx 



!-!-! XXVIII. DEITTEKOXOMY. 

36 of thy feet to the crown of thy head. The Lord carry away 
thee, and thy rulers, whom thou mayst set over thee, to 
a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers knew, that thou 

37 mayst there serve other gods — stocks and stones ; and be there 
for a bye word, and a proverb, and a public example to all the 

38 nations to which the Lord shall bring thee. There thou shalt 
carry out much seed into the field, and shalt bring little home, 

39 for the locust shall devour it ; thou shalt plant a vineyard and 
dress it ; but shalt not press out wine, nor regale thyself from 

40 it ; for worms shall eat it up. Thou shalt have plantations of 
olive trees, in all thy borders, but shalt not be anointed with 

41 oil, for thine olive tree shall cast its fruit : thou shalt beget sons 
and daughters, but shalt not have them with thee ; for they 

42 shall go into captivity. All thy trees and the products of thy 

43 land, shall be consumed with blasting. The stranger who is 
with thee shall rise higher and higher ; but thou shalt fall low- 

44 er and lower. He shall lend to thee ; and thou shalt not lend 

45 to him : He shall be head ; and thou shalt be tail. All these 
curses shall actually come upon thee, and pursue thee, and 
overtake thee, until he root thee out, and utterly destroy thee 
because thou didst not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy 
God, to keep his commandments, and his rules of rectitude, 

46 which he commanded thee, And they shall be signs for thee, 
and wonders for thine offspring forever. 

47 Because thou didst not serve the Lord thy God with glad- 
ness, and with a good understanding, for the abundance of all 

48 things ; therefore thou shalt serve thine enemies, whom the 
Lord will send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in 
nakedness, and in want of all things, and thou shalt wear a yoke 

49 of iron on thy neck, until it utterly destroy thee. The Lord 
will bring against thee a nation from afar — from the extremi- 

50 ty of the earth, with the impetuosity of an eagle — A nation 
whose voice thou shalt not understand — a nation of an un- 
blushing countenance, which will not respect the person of an 

51 elder, nor compassionate a youth. And it shall devour the in- 
crease of thy cattle, and the products of thy land, so as not to 
leave thee corn, wine, oil, herds or flocks, until it hath destroyed 
thee, and wasted thee in thy cities — until they have demolished 

52 thy high, and strong walls, in which thou hast placed thy con- 



Ck. XXVIII. DEUTEKONOMY. 

53 fidence, throughout thy whole laud. And when he shall afflict 
thee in thy cities which he hath given thee ; in thy siege, and 
in the affliction, with which thine enemy shall afflict thee, thou 
shalt eat the offspring of thy body — the flesh of thy sons., and 

54 thy daughters, whom he gave thee. The tender, and very de- 
licate man who is with thee, will look with an evil eye on his 
brother, and on the wife in his bosom, and the remaining chil- 

55 dren which may be left him, so as not to give one of them any 
of the flesh of his sons, which he may be eating, because he hath 
nothing left him in the siege, and in that affliction of thine with 

56 which thine enemies will afflict thee, in all thy cities. And the 
tender, and very delicate woman among you, whose foot never 
ventured to tread the ground because of her delicateness, and 
effeminacy will look with an evil eye on her husband in her 
bosom, and on her son, and her daughter, even the female in- 
fant she bore, or the male child which she may have brought 

57 forth ; for on the account of the want of all things, she will eat 
these secretly in thy siege, and in that affliction of thine with 
which thine enemy will afflict thee in thy cities. 

58 If thou wilt not hearken to do all the words of this law, 
which are written in this book, to fear this glorious, this won- 

59 derful name, The Lord tliy God, the Lord will make thy 
plagues, and the plagues of thy seed, wonderful beyond con- 
ception — he will make them great, and marvellous, and thy 
diseases sore, and lasting, and will bring upon thee all the af- 

60 fliction of Egypt — that grievous affliction which thou didst 

61 dread on their account, and they shall cleave to thee. The Lord 
will also bring upon thee every sickness, and every plague, 
which is not written, and every one which is written in this 

62 book of the law, until he root thee out. And you shall be left 
few in number, instead of being, as you were, like the stars of 

63 heaven for multitude. Because thou didst not hearken to the 
voice of the Lord thy God, therefore it shall come to pass, that 
as the Lord delighted in you to do you good, and to multiply 
you ; so the Lord will rejoice over you, in rooting you out ; 
and you shall be removed speedily from the land to which 

61 thou art going to take possession of it. And the Lord thy God 
will scatter thee among all the uations, from one extremity of 
the earth to the other ; and thou shalt there serve other gods 



!-!-! XXIX. DEUTERONOMY. 

— stocks and stones, which neither thou, nor thy fathers have 

65 known. But even among these nations he will not give thee rest, 
nor shall there be any rest for the sole of thy foot. Indeed the 
Lord will give thee there a strange trembling heart, and failing 

66 eyes, and a desponding soul, and thy life shall hang in sus- 
pence before thine eyes, and thou shalt be in terror, day and 

67 night, and have no assurance of thy life. In the morning thou 
wilt say ; How will it be with me in the evening ! And in the 
evening thou wilt say, How may it be with me in the morning ! 
on account of the terror of thy heart with which thou shalt be 
affrighted, and on account of the sights of thine eyes which 

68 thou shalt see. And the Lord will send thee back into Egypt, 
in ships, (by the way which I ordered thou shalt see it no 
more :) and thou shalt there be exposed to sale to your ene- 
mies, for bond men and bond women, and there will be no pur- 
chaser. 

XXIX. These were the words of the covenant, which the 
Lord commanded Moses to state to the children of Israel, in 
the land of Moab, over and above the covenant which he had 
made with them at Choreb. 

2 Then Moses called all the sons of Israel, and said to them, 
You have seen all the things which the Lord did in Egypt, be- 
fore your eyes, to Pharao and his servants, and all his land — 

3 those great trials which your eyes have seen, those signs, and 

4 those great wonders. Now hath not the Lord God given you 
a heart to know, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, even at this 

5 day ? When he led you forty years in the wilderness, your 
clothes did not grow too old, nor were your shoes worn out 

6 from your feet. You did not eat bread, nor drink wine, nor 

7 strong drink, that you might know that the Lord lam is your God. 
And when you came to this place, and Seon, king of Esebon, and 

8 Og king of Basan, came out to meet us in battle, we smote them, 
and took their land, and I have given it to Reuben, and Gad, and 

9 to the half of the tribe of Manasses : you shall therefore be care- 

10 ful to perform all the words of this covenant. In order that you 
might fully comprehend all that you are to do, you have this 
day stood, all of you, before the Lord your God, the chiefs of 
your tribes, and your senate, and your judges, and your offi- 

11 cers, every man of Israel, your wives, and your children, and 



!-!-! XXTX. DEUTERONOMY. 

the stranger who is in your camp, from the hewer of wood to 

12 the drawer of water, to enter into a covenant with the Lord your 

13 God, and into the curses which the Lord thy God this day 
stateth to thee, that he may establish thee a people for himself. 

14 So he himself will be thy God, as he said to thee, and as he 
hath sworn to thy fathers, Abraham, and Isaak, and Jacob. 

15 Now I make this covenant, and this oath, not with you only, 
but both with those who are here this day, with you before 
the Lord your God, and with those who are not here with you 

16 this day. Inasmuch as you know how we lived in the land of 

17 Egypt, and have seen, as we passed through the nations, 
through which you passed, their abominations and their idols, 

18 wood and stone, silver and gold, which are among them ; is 
there any man among you, or any woman, or family, or tribe, 
whose understanding hath turned them from the Lord your 
God, to go and serve the gods of those nations ? Is there any 
such root among you, springing up for gall and bitterness ? 

19 Now in case any one shall hear the words of this curse, and 
bless himself in his heart, saying, Good luck betide me ! I will 
walk in the error of my own heart, that the sinner may not in- 

20 volve the guiltless in ruin with himself. God will not be pro- 
pitious to him, but most assuredly the anger of the Lord, and 
his indignation, will then be kindled against that man ; and all 
the curses of this covenant, which are written in this book, 

21 shall cleave to him ; and the Lord will blot out his name from 
under heaven. The Lord will indeed separate him, from all 
the children of Israel, according to all the curses of this cove- 

22 nant, which are written in this book of the law. And when 
the generations to come — your children who shall rise up af- 
ter yon, and the stranger who may come from a far distant 
country, will say — when they shall see the plagues of that 
land, and the diseases thereof, which the Lord hath sent upon 

23 it — brimstone and burnt salt — when through the whole land 
there shall be no sowing — no natural productions, no verdure 
on it, a destruction like that of Sodom and Gomorra, Adama 
and Seboim, which the Lord overthrew with wrath and indig- 

24 nation — When all the nations shall say, Why hath the Lord 
dealt thus witli this land? What hath occasioned this great 

25 fierceness of indignation ? Then they will say, Because they 



!-!-! XXX. DEUTERONOMY. 

forsook the covenant of the Lord, the God of their fathers, 
which he made with their fathers, when he brought them out 

26 of the land of Egypt, and went and served strange gods, which 

27 they did not know, and which he had not arranged for them, 
therefore the Lord was provoked to wrath against this land, to 
bring upon it all the curses which are written in the book of 

28 the law; and the Lord rooted them out from their land, with 
wrath, and anger, and very great indignation, and cast them 
out into another land, as at this day. 

29 The things which are secret are for the Lord our God ; but 
the things which are manifest are for us and our children forever, 

XXX. that we may perform all the words of this law ; there- 
fore when all these things have come upon thee, the blessing 
and the curse, which I have set before thee ; and thou shalt re- 
ceive them into thy heart, among all the nations where the Lord 

2 may have dispersed thee ; and shalt turn to the Lord thy God, 
and hearken to his voice, according to all that I this day com- 

3 mand thee, with thy whole heart and with thy whole soul ; the 
Lord will heal thy sins, and have compassion on thee, and ga- 
ther thee again out of all the nations among which the Lord 

•A hath dispersed thee. Though thy dispersion may have been 
from one end of the earth to the other, thence the Lord thy 

5 God will gather thee, and thence the Lord thy God will take 
thee, and thence thy God will bring thee, into the land which 

6 thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it : And he will 
deal kindly with thee, and make thee more numerous than thy 
fathers : And the Lord will purify thy heart, and the heart of 
thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and 

7 with thy whole soul, that thou mayst live. And the Lord thy 
God will lay all these curses upon thine enemies, and upon them 

8 who hate thee, and have persecuted thee. When thou shalt 
return, and hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and per- 

9 form these commandments of his, which I this day enjoin thee, 
the Lord thy God will bless thee in every work of thy hands, 
in the offspring of thy body, and in the increase of thy cattle, 
and in the products of thy land ; for the Lord thy God will turn 
again to rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fa- 
ll) thers, if thou wilt hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God to 

keep his commandments, and his rules of rectitude, and these 



Oh. XXXI. DEUTEEONOMY. 

judgments of his which are written in this book of the law— if 
thou wilt turn to the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and 

11 with thy whole soul. For this command which I this day give 

12 thee in charge is not grievous, nor is it far from thee. It is not 
in heaven above, that thou shouldst say, Who will ascend for us 
into heaven, and bring it to us, that we may hear and do it ? 

13 Nor is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldst say, Who will 
cross the sea for us, and bring it to us, and let us hear it, that 

14 we may do it ? The word is very near thee, in thy mouth and 
in thy heart, and in thy hand, to do it. 

15 Behold I have this day set before thee Life and Death, 

16 Good and Evil. If thou wilt hearken to the commandments of 
the Lord thy God which I this day enjoin thee, to love the 
Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his rules of 
rectitude, and his judgments, you shall live, and multiply, and 
the Lord thy God will bless thee in all the land to which thou 

17 art going, there to take possession of it. But if thy heart turn 
aside, and thou wilt not hearken, but go astray, and worship 

18 other gods, and serve them, I announce to thee this day, that 
you shall surely perish, and shall not prolong your lives in the 
land, to which you are about to cross the Jordan, to take pos- 

19 session of it. I call heaven and earth this day to witness against 
you, that I have set Life and Death, the Blessing and the Curse 

20 before you. Chuse thou life, that thou and thy seed may live, 
by loving the Lord thy God, and hearkening to his voice, and 
cleaving to him. For this is thy life, and the lengthening of thy 
days, to dwell in the land which the Lord solemnly promised 
thy fathers, Abraham, and Isaak, and Jacob, that he would 
give them. 

XXXI. When Moses had finished speaking all these words, 

2 to all the children of Israel, he said to them, I am now a hun- 
dred and twenty years old. I shall no more be able to go out, 
and come in before you : for the Lord hath said to me, Thou 

3 shalt not cross the Jordan. The Lord thy God, who goeth be- 
fore thee, will himself drive out those nations from before thee, 
and thou shalt possess them ; and Joshua is to go before thee, 

4 as the Lord hath spoken. The Lord thy God will indeed do 
to them as he did to Seon, and Og, the two kings of the Amor- 
ites, who were on this side the Jordan, and to their land — in 



Oh. XXXI. DEUTEKOXOMY. 

the same maimer as the Lord rooted them out, and delivered 
5 them up to you. And you shall do to them as I have com- 
9 manded you. Act manfully, and be strong; fear not, nor be 

faint hearted, nor terrified at them ; for the Lord thy God, who 

goeth before you, is with you — is among you. May he never 

leave thee, nor forsake thee. 

7 Then Moses called Joshua, and said to him before all Is- 
rael, Be courageous, and strong ; for thou shalt go before this 
people, into the land which the Lord solemnly promised your 
lathers to give them ; and thou shalt put them in possession of 

8 it ; and the Lord, who marcheth with thee, will not leave thee 
nor forsake thee. Fear not, nor be dismayed. 

9 Xow Moses had written the words of this law in a book ; 
so he gave it to the priests, the children of Levi, who carry 
the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and to the elders of the 

10 children of Israel. And Moses gave them a charge on that day 
saying, At the end of every seven years, at the Solemnity of 

11 the Kelease, during the festival of tabernacles, when all Israel 
assemble, to appear before the Lord your God, in the place 
which the Lord shall chuse ; you shall read this law before all 

12 Israel, in their hearing. Let the people be assembled, the men, 
and the women, and the children, and the proselyte who is 
in your cities, that they may hear, and that they may learn to 
fear the Lord your God; and let them hearken to do all the 

13 words of this law. And let their children who have not known, 
hearken, and learn to fear the Lord thy God, all the days they 
live in the land to which you are going, to cross the Jordan, 
there to take possession of it. 

14 Xow when the Lord said to Moses, Behold the time of thy 
death approacheth, call Joshua, and stand at the doors of the 
tabernacle of the testimony, and I will give him a charge ; 
thereupon Moses went with Joshua to the tabernacle of the 
testimony, and they stood at the doors of the tabernacle of the 

15 testimony, and the Lord descended in a cloud, and stood at 

16 the doors of the tabernacle of the testimony, and while the pil- 
lar of the cloud stood at the doors of the tabernacle of the tes- 
timony, the Lord said to Moses, Behold when thou sleepest 
with thy fathers, this people will rise up, and go a whoring 
after the strange gods of the land to which they are going. 



!-!-! XXXI. DEUTERONOMY. 

And when they forsake me, and break my covenant which 

17 I have made with them, I shall be provoked to wrath against 
them that day, and I will leave them, and turn away my face 
from them, and they shall be devoured. And when many 
evils and afflictions shall befal them, then will one say in 
that day, Because the Lord my God is not with me, these evils 

18 have befallen me. But I will turn away my face from them, on 
that day, because of all their wickedness which they have 

19 committed, because they have turned to strange gods. Now 
therefore write the words of this Ode and teach it to the chil- 
dren of Israel, and put it into their mouth, that this Ode may 

20 be an open witness for me among the children of Israel. For 
when I bring them into that good land, which I solemnly pro- 
mised their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and 
honey, they will eat, and be satiated, and they will turn to 
strange gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my 

21 covenant ; but this Ode will rise up, and witness against them ; 
for it shall never be forgotten out of their mouth, nor out of the 
mouth of their seed : for I know their wickedness, what they 
do even now before I have brought them into that good land 
which I solemnly promised their fathers. 

22 So Moses wrote the Ode that day and taught it to the chil- 

23 dren of Israel. And the Lord gave a charge to Joshua, and 
said, Be courageous, and strong, for thou shalt conduct the 
children of Israel into the land which the Lord solemnly pro- 
mised them, and he will be with thee. 

21 Now when Moses had made an end of writing all the words 

25 of this law in a book, even to the close, he gave a charge to the 
Levites, who carry the ark of the covenant of the Lord, say- 

26 ing, Take this book of the law ; and put it by the side of the 
ark of the covenant of the Lord your God ; and it shall be 

27 there for a witness against thee ; for I know thy contentious 
disposition, and thy stiff neck. For even now while I am yet alive 
with you, you have been rebellious against God ; how then can 

28 it be otherwise after my death ? Assemble before me the heads 
of your tribes, and your elders, and your judges, and your un- 
der officers, that I may speak in their hearing all these words 

21) and call heaven and earth to witness against them. For I know 
that after my death you will commit iniquity, and turn aside 
vol. i. v v 



!-!-! XXXII. DEUTERONOMY. 

out of the way which I commanded you, and evils will befal 
you in the latter days, because you will do evil before the Lord, 
to provoke him to wrath by the works of your hands. 

30 Then for a conclusion Moses spoke in the hearing of all the 
congregation the words of this Ode. 

XXXII. Listen, heaven, and I will speak, 

And let the earth hear the words of my mouth. 

2 Let my doctrine be expected like rain, 
And my words distil as the dew ; 
Like gentle rain on the tender herb, 
And like a heavy shower on the grass. 

3 Since I have proclaimed the name of the Lord, 
Ascribe ye majesty to our God. 

4 He is God, his works are perfect ; 
All his ways are acts of judgment — 
A faithful God ; he doth no injustice ; 
Righteous and holy is the Lord. 

5 They have sinned ! blemished children are not his. 
Crooked and perverse generation ! 

6 Do ye thus requite the Lord ? 

Are the people so foolish and unwise ? 
Did not this thy father purchase thee ? 
Did he not make and fashion thee ? 

7 Remember the days of old ; 
Consider the years of ages past ; 
Ask thy father ; he can tell thee — 
Thine elders ; they can inform thee : 

8 When the Most High divided nations — 
When he dispersed the children of Adam, 
He settled the boundaries of nations, 
According to the number of God's messengers ; 

9 And the Lord's portion was his people Jacob — 
Israel was his lot of inheritance. 

10 He sustained them in the wilderness, 

In the drought of heat, in a land without water. 
He led them about, and instructed them — 
He kept them as the apple of his eye. 

11 As an eagle would defend his nest, 
And, when anxious for his young, 



!-!-! XXXII. DEUTERONOMY. 

Would spread out his wings, and receive them, 
And bare them up on his shoulders ; 

12 The Lord alone conducted them, 

And there was not a strange god with them. 

13 He brought them up to the strength of this land, 
He fed them with the products of the fields — 
They sucked honey out of a rock, 

And oil out of a flinty rock ; 

14 With butter of kine, and with milk of sheep ; 

With the fattest of lambs and rams, young bulls and goats, 

And with bread of the choicest wheat ; 

And they drank wine, the pure juice of the grape. 

15 When Jacob had eaten and was filled, 
Then he who was beloved began to kick ; 

He grew fat, waxed thick, and became corpulent, 
Then he forsook the God who made him ; 
And apostatised from God his saviour. 

16 They exasperated me with strange gods, 
With their abominations they provoked me, 

17 They sacrificed to demons, and not to God — 
To gods, which they had never known, 
Which had started up, new and fictitious, 
Of which their fathers had no knowledge, 

18 The God who begot thee, thou hast forsaken, 
And hast forgot the God who nourished thee ; 

19 And the Lord saw, and was provoked to jealousy — 

He was provoked at the temper of his sons and daughters, 

20 xVnd said, I will turn away my face from them, 
And shew what shall befal them in the latter days. 

Because they are a perverse generation — 
Children, who have no faith in them — 

21 They have provoked me by what is not God — 
Have exasperated me with their idols ; 

I therefore will provoke them by what is not a nation, 
By a foolish nation I will vex them. 

22 Since a fire is kindled because of my wrath, 
It shall burn down to the lowest Hades ; 

It shall consume the land, and the products thereof ; 
It shall set on fire the foundations of mountains : 



!-!-! XXXII. DEUTEKONOMY. 

23 I will assemble evils against them, 
And hurl my bolts at them. 

24 While they are wasting by famine, and voracious birds ; 
The burning carbuncle also shall be incurable ; 

I will send against them the teeth of wild beasts, 
With the venom of serpents, trailing on the ground. 

25 Abroad the sword shall bereave them of children, 
And in their chambers terror shall destroy. 

The youth shall perish with the young virgin, 
The sucking infant with the venerable sage. 

26 I had determined to disperse them, 

And cause the remembrance of them to cease among men ; 

27 Had it not been for the temper of enemies ; 
That the adversaries might not out live them — 
That they might not fall upon them at once ; 
Lest they should say, Our own high hand, 
And not the Lord, hath done all this. 

28 It is a nation devoid of counsel ; 
There is no knowledge among them. 

29 They have not bent their minds to understand ; 
Let them lay up these things for time to come. 

30 How could one man chase a thousand, 
And two put myriads to flight, 

Had not God cast them off — 

Had not the Lord delivered them up ? 

31 For their gods are not like our God ; 

And our enemies are without understanding. 

32 As their vine is from the vine of Sodom 
And their shoot from that of Gomorra ; 

Their cluster of grapes will be a cluster of gall — 
A cluster of bitterness it shall be to them : 

33 Their wine shall be the venom of dragons — 
The incurable venom of asps. 

34 Behold ! are not these things stored up with me ? 
And sealed up among my treasures ? 

35 In the day of vengeance I will requite, 
When their foot shall be supplanted. 
Because the day of destruction is nigh for them, 
Therefore at hand are the things prepared for you. 



!-!-! XXXII. DEUTERONOMY. 

36 Because the Lord will judge his people — 
When he shall be appeased for his servants, 
(For he saw that they were enfeebled, 

Made faint by hostile invasions and dejected) 

37 Then the Lord said, where are their gods — 

The gods in which they placed their confidence ? 

38 The fat of those sacrifices you ate 
And drank the wine of their libations ? 
Let them arise and help you, 

And let them be your protectors. 

39 See ! See ! that I am the Self existent, 
And that there is no Clod besides me ; 
I kill, and I can cause to live, 

I can smite and I can heal, 

And none can rescue out of my hand — 

40 For I can lift up my hand to heaven, 

And swear by my right hand, and say, as I live forever, 

41 I will make my sword sharp as lightning, 
And my hand will support judgment ; 

And I will execute vengeance on mine enemies, 
And make retribution to them who hate me. 

42 I will make my arrows drunk with blood, 
And my sword shall devour flesh 

With the blood of slain and captives. 

43 From the head of enemy chiefs. 
Rejoice, heavens, with him, 

And let all the angels of God worship him : 

Rejoice, nations, with his people, 

And let all the children of God rely on him : 

For he avengeth the blood of his children, 

And will judge, and execute vengeance on his enemies, 

To them who hate him he will render retribution, 

And the Lord will purify the land of his people. 

44 Now on that day when Moses had written this Ode and taught 

45 it to the children of Israel ; and he, and Joshua the son of Nave, 
had come, and spoken all the words of this law in the hearing 
of the people, Moses concluded his speech to all Israel with this 

46 address to them, Attend with your heart to all these words 
which I this day testify to you, and which you are to give in 



!-!-! XXXIII. DEUTERONOMY. 

charge to your children, that they may keep, and perform all 

47 the words of this law ; for this is not a vain thing for you ; for 
it is your life ; and, for the sake of this word, you shall prolong 
your days in the land to which you are going, to cross the 
Jordan to take possession. 

48 Then the Lord spoke to Moses that day, saying, Go up 
the mountain Abarim, to that mount Nabo, which is in the 
land of Moab, fronting Jericho, and take a view of the land of 

49 Chanaan, which I give to the children of Israel; and die on 

50 the mount to which thou goest up, and be gathered to thy peo- 
ple, in the same manner as thy brother Aaron died on mount 

51 Or, and was gathered to his people, because you disobeyed 
my word among the children of Israel, at the water of strife, 

52 at Kades, in the wilderness of Sin. Because you did not hal- 
low me among the children of Israel, thou shalt see the land at 
a distance, but shalt not go in thither. 

XXXIII. Now this is the blessing with which Moses, the man 
of God blessed the children of Israel, before his death ; and 
he said, 

2 The Lord came from Sina 

And shined upon us out of Seir ; 
He hasted from mount Paran, 
With myriads from Kades ; 
His angels with him on his right. 

3 He compassionated his people ; 
All the sanctified are under thy sway, 
But these are immediately under thee. 

4 From His words Moses received the law 
Which he gave in charge to us, 

An inheritance for the assemblies of Jacob. 

5 Let Him therefore be chief among the beloved. 

When the chiefs of peoples assemble with the tribes of Is- 
rael, 

6 Let Reuben live and not die, 

And Symeon though he be few in number. 

7 Now this was the blessing of Juda 
Hear, Lord, the voice of Juda ! 
And until thou comest to his people ; 
Let his hands contend for them, 



Oh. XXXIII. DEUTERONOMY. 

And be thou his help from enemies. 

8 And of Levi he said 

Assign ye to Levi his manifestations, 

And his truth to this man for the Holy One 

Whom they tried at Temptation. 

Whom they reviled at the water of Contradiction. 

9 With regard to him who saith to his father and to his 

mother 
I have not beheld thee, 
And hath not acknowledged his brethren, 
And hath renounced his own children, 
He it is who hath observed thine Oracles 
And diligently kept thy covenant. 

10 Let them explain thy rules of rectitude for Jacob 
And thy law for Israel : 

Let them lay incense continually, 
When thou art angry, on thine altar. 

11 Bless, Lord, his endeavours, 
And accept the works of his hands. 
Pierce the loins of enemies, 

Who have risen up against him : 

And let them who hate him never rise up. 

12 And of Benjamin he said, 

Beloved ! He shall dwell securely under the Lord. 

God overshadoweth him continually, 

And hath taken up his rest between his shoulders. 

13 And of Joseph he said, 

His land is a special blessing of the Lord 

On account of heavenly seasons and dew, 

And on account of abysses of fountains from beneath, 

14 And on account of the productions, in due season 

Of the sun's revolutions and the changes of the moon, 

15 As his land of plenty is beautified 
With summits of ancient mountains 
And with summits of everlasting hills ; 

16 So may the things acceptable 

To him who appeared in the bush, 
Come upon the head of Joseph ; 
He indeed is glorified 



!-!-! XXXIII. DEUTERONOMY. 

In being the head over brothers. 

17 His beauty is that of a firstling bull, 
His horns are the horns of an Unicorn, 
With these he will push the nations at once, 
Even from the limits of the land. 

These are the myriads of Ephraim ; 
And these the thousands of Manasses. 

18 And of Zabulon he said, 

Rejoice, Zabulon, in thine outgoings ; 
And let Issachar rejoice in his abodes. 

19 They shall utterly root out nations. 
And there you shall invoke, 

And there offer the sacrifice of righteousness. 

For the riches of the sea shall feed thee, 

And a commerce with the dwellers on the sea coast. 

20 And of Gad he said 

Blessed is he who enlargeth Gad. 
Like a lion he lay down to rest, 
Having broken an arm and a chief. 

21 He took a view of his portion 
Because land was there divided. 

When chiefs assembled with the leaders of tribes ; 

The Lord executed Justice 

And determined his cause with Israel. 

22 And of Dan he said 
Dan is a lion's whelp ; 

He will make excursions beyond Basan. 

23 And of Xephthaleim he said, 
Xephthaleim hath abundance of good things ; 
May he be filled with blessings from the Lord ! 
He shall possess the west and the south. 

24 And of Aser he said, 
Aser is blessed with children, 

He will be acceptable to his brethren. 
He shall bathe his foot in oil, 

25 His shoe shall be iron and brass. 

As thy days so shall be thy strength. 

26 There is none like the God of the Beloved. 
He who rideth on the heaven is thy helper, 



!-!-! XXXIV. DEUTERONOMY. 

And be is mighty to give support. 

27 The governance of God will protect thee 
When under the power of everlasting arms. 
He will drive out the enemy before thee, 
Sayiug, Be devoted to destruction ! 

28 And Israel shall dwell securely alone, 

In the land of Jacob, fed with corn and wine : 
And the heaven shall drop with dew for thee. 

29 Blessed art thou, Israel ! 

Who is like thee, people saved by the Lord ! 

Thy helper will protect thee, 

His sword shall be thy boast, 

Thine enemies shall submit to thee, 

And thou shalt ride upon their neck. 
XXXIV. Then Moses went up from Araboth Moab to mount 
Nabo, to the top of Phasga, which is over against Jericho, and 
the Lord shewed him all the land of Galaad, even to Dan, and 

2 all the land of Nephthaleim, and all the land of Ephraim, and 
Manasses, and all the land of Juda, even to the farther sea, and 

3 the wilderness, and the country around Jericho, the city of palm 

4 trees, even to Segor. And the Lord said to Moses, This is the 
land which I solemnly promised to Abraham, and Isaak, and 
Jacob, saying, To your seed I will give it. I have pointed it 
out to thine eyes, but thou shalt not go thither. 

5 So Moses the servant of the Lord died, by the command 

6 of the Lord, in jthe land of Moab ; and he was buried at Gai 
near the house of Phogor. But none knoweth his sepulchre at 
this day. 

7 Though Moses was an hundred and twenty years old, his 

8 eyes were not dim, nor was his natural strength abated. And 
the children of Israel mourned for Moses, in Araboth Moab, 

9 by the Jordan, over against Jericho, thirty days. And when the 
days of Imourning for Moses were fulfilled, as Joshua son of 
Nave was filled with a spirit of wisdom, (for Moses had laid his 
hands upon him) the children of Israel hearkened to him, and 

10 did as the Lord commanded Moses. But there no more arose 

a prophet in Israel like Moses, whom the Lord knew face to 

face, in all the signs and wonders which the Lord sent him to do 

in the land of Egypt, on Pharao and his servants, and on all his 

vol. i. z z 



!-!-! XXXIV. DEUTERONOMY. 

land, the great miracles, and the strong hand, which Moses ex- 
hibited in the sisrht of all Israel. 